The epidermis is a stratified and keratinizing squamous epi-thelium that dynamically renews itself maintaining its nor-mal thickness by the process of desquamation. The cells in the epidermis include: keratinocytes, melanocytes, Langerhans cells, Toker cells (in certain anatomic locations), and Merkel cells. In addition, the epidermis contains the openings for the eccrine ducts and hair follicles. Recent immunohistochemical studies have demonstrated that the epidermis contains free nerve axons in association with Langerhans cells. Kera tin 0cytes The keratinocytes of the epidermis are stratified into four orderly layers from bottom to top: the basal layer (stra-tum basale, germinativum), the squamous layer (prickle cell layer or stratum spinosum), the granular layer (stra-tum granulosum), the cornified or horny layer (stratum corneum). In histologic sections, the derrno-epidermal junction has an irregular contour because of the upward extension of the papillary dermis to form the dermal papillae. The portion on the epidermis separating the der-mal papillae are the rete ridges. The transcription factor p63 plays an important role in this orderly arrangement and continuous development of the pre- and the post-natal skin. THE BASAL LAYER Basal cells are the mitotically active cells that give rise to the other keratinocytes. Histologically, basal cells are seen as a single layer of cells above the base-papillary dermis (1,papillary dermis; 2, basal cells; 3, squamous layer; 4, granular layer; 5, cornified layer). ment membrane that show minor variation in size, shape, and melanin content. Basal cells are columnar or cuboi-dal, with a basophilic cytoplasm. The nucleus is round or oval, with coarse chromatin and indistinct nucleolus. Basal cells contain melanin in their cytoplasm as a result of pig-ment transfer from neighboring melanocytes. Basal cells are connected to each other and to keratinocytes by specialized regions located in the plasma cell membranes. They are aligned perpendicular to the subepi-dermal basement membrane and attached to it by modified desmosomes, hemidesmosomes. Certain dermatitides involving the basal layer produce vacuolar alteration of the basal cells, which may progress to the formation of subsequent subepidermal vesicles as seen in diseases such as graft-versus-host disease, lupus erythe-matosus, and erythema multiforme. papillary dermis, and reticular dermis. THE SQUAMOUS LAYER The squamous layers are composed of approximately five to ten layers of cells with keratinocytes larger than the basal cells. The suprabasal keratinocytes are polyhedral, have a somewhat basophilic cytoplasm, and a round nucleus. Again, melanin is seen scattered in many of these keratinocytes, where it provides protection from the damaging effect of ultraviolet light. The more superficial cells are larger, flattened, eosinophilic, and oriented parallel to the surface. The keratinocytes contain one or two conspicuous nucleoli and tonofilaments within the cytoplasm. The squamous layer is also called the spinous or prickle cell layer because of the characteristic appearance by light microscopy of short projections extending from cell to cell. These projections are the result of retraction of the plasma membrane during tissue processing, whereas the desmo-somes remain relatively fixed and correlate with intercel-lular bridges. Desmosomes are composed of a variety of polypeptides, desmogleins and desmocollins as transmembrane constitu-ents and the desmoplakin, plakoglobin, and plakophilin as cytoplasmic components. In addition, other intercellular junctions are distinct from desmosomes in composition and distribution and provide alternative cell-to-cell adhesion mechanisms. Anintercellular space of constant dimension is present between each cell; acid and neutral mucopolysaccharides are present in the intercellular spaces as indicated by spe-cial stains. The pemphigus antigens are localized in the cell membranes or in the desmosomes of these cells. Toker cells: It is important to recognize that occasionally cells with clear or pale cytoplasms are seen in the squamous layer. These cells must be distinguished from the neoplastic cells of Paget's disease. Benign clear cells have a pyknotic nucleus surrounded by a clear halo and a narrow rim of clear cytoplasm. They lack the pleomorphism, nuclear morphology, and intensity of the chromatin staining seen in Paget's cells. Regardless of gender, these benign clear cells are often seen in the epidermis of the nipple, the accessory nipple, and the pubic regions or in the milk line distribution. In the nipple, these clear cells, also called Toker cells, have been consid-ered to be non-neoplastic ductal epithelial cells, although some authors hypothesized that these cells might be the precursors of mammary or extramammary Paget's diseases. Those outside of the nipple are considered to be the result of either abnormal keratinization or aberrant derivatives of eccrine or apocrine sweat gland epithelial cells. They may present as hypopigmented macules or papules in a rare disorder called clear cell papulosis. The immunohistochemical staining pattern of benign clear cells may resemble that of Paget's cells in that they react with the cytokeratin CK7 but differ from Paget's cells in that they are usually negative for GCDFP-15. However, emphasis should be made that morphologic distinction is the most important manner to differentiate both cells.Common inflammatory changes seen in the squamous layer are spongiosis-intercellular edema (eg, allergic con-tact dermatitis), acanthosis-thickening of the epidermis, atrophy-thinning of the epidermis (eg, discoid lupus erythematosus), acantholysis-detachment of keratinocytes because of changes involving intercellular junctions, and dyskeratosis-abnormal keratinization. THE GRANULAR LAYER The granular layer is com-posed of one to three layers of flattened cells lying paral-lel to the skin surface. The cytoplasm contains intensely basophilic-stained granules known as the keratohyalin gran-ules. In contrast, trichohyalin granules (produced by the inner root sheath of hair follicles) are stained red on routine hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections. The kerato-hyalin granules are histidine rich and are the precursors to the protein filaggrin, which promotes aggregation of keratin filaments in the cornified layer. Histologic observation of this layer can provide key findings in certain entities such as increase (eg, lichen pla-nus) and decrease in the thickness of the granular layer. Keratinocytes located between the squamous layer and the granular layer, contain small membrane-coating gran-ules known as lamellar granules (also called Odland bodies or keratinosomes). They are composed of the acid hydrolase and of neutral sugars conjugated with proteins and lipids. These granules are present both intra- and extracellularly, are approximately 300 nm in diameter, and are not visible by light microscopy. Their functions are to provide epidermal lipids, increase the barrier property of the cornified layer against water loss, and aid in the desquamation process. This interface between the squamous and the granular layer is also the site of synthesis and storage of cholesterol. THE CORNIFIED LAYER The cornified layer is com-posed of multiple layers of polyhedral eosinophilic kera-tinocytes that lack a nucleus and cytoplasmic organelles. These cells are the most differentiated cells of the kera-tinization system. They are composed entirely of high-molecular weight keratin filaments. In formalin-fixed sec-tion, the cornified layers are arranged in a basket-weave pattern. These cells eventually shed from the surface of the skin. The process of keratinization takes 20 to 45 days. Figure 1.2).In histologic sections taken from the skin of the palms and soles, a homogenous eosinophilic zone, known as the stratum lucidum is present in the lowest portion of the cor-nified layer. This additional layer is rich in extracellular elements such as energetic enzymes and SH groups adding to the normal functional barrier of the skin. Common abnormalities of the cornified layer are hyperkeratosis-increased thickness in the cornified layer, parakeratosis-presence of nuclei in the cornified layer, and presence of fungal organisms (superficial derma-tophytosis) . Basement Membrane Zone The basement membrane zone separates the epidermal basal layer from the dermis. It is seen by light microscopy as a continuous, undulating, and thin periodic acid-Schiff-stained layer. By electron microscopy, the basal cells are attached to the basal lamina by hernides-mosomes. Ultrastructurally, the basement membrane zone is composed of four distinct structures, from top to bottom: 1.The plasma membrane of the basal cells containing the hemidesmosomes. Bullous pemphigoid antigen 1 is localized in the intracellular component of hernides-mosomes. 2.The lamina lucida, an electron-lucent area with anchor-ing filaments containing various laminin isoforms. Bullous pemphigoid antigen 2 is associated with the transmembrane component of hemidesmosome-anchoring filament complexes in the lamina lucida. It is also the site of the blister in derma-titis herpetiformis. 3. The lamina densa, an electron-dense area composed of mainly type IV collagen. hemidesmosome; 2, lamina lucida; 3, lamina densa; 4, lamina reticularis; 5, melanin; 6, tonofilaments). 4.The sublamina densa zone, or pars fibroreticularis, contains mainly the anchoring fibrils (type VII col-lagen) that attach the basal lamina to the connective tissue of the dermis. Antibodies against epidermolysis bullosa acquisita react with the carboxy terminus of type VII collagen. Inflammatory conditions of the basement membrane can be seen by light microscopy as thickening (eg, discoid lupus erythematosus) or by the formation of subepidermal vesicles. Melanocytes Melanocytes are dendritic cells that derive from the neu-ral crest. During migration from the neural crest, mela-nocytes may localize in other epithelia. In the epidermis, the melanocytes are localized in the basal layer, and their dendritic processes extend in all directions. The dendritic nature of normal melanocytes is usually not seen in routine H&E-stained sections. In H&E preparations, melanocytes are composed of elongated or ovoid nuclei surrounded by a clear space. They are usually smaller than the neighboring basal keratinocytes. Melanocytes do not contain tonofilaments and do not attach to basal cells with desmosomes. However, anchoring filaments extend from the plasma membrane of these melanocytes to the basal lamina. Laminin-5, a component of anchoring filaments,within a clear space. may be a ligand for melanocyte attachment to the base-ment membrane in vivo. In addition, melanocytes that are close to the basal lamina have structures resembling hemidesmosomes of basal keratinocytes. Melanocytes produce and secrete melanin. Melanin can be red or yellow-black. The most important function of melanin is to protect against the injurious effects of non-ionizing ultraviolet irradiation. Melanin is formed through a complex metabolic pro-cess in which tyrosinase is the main catabolic enzyme, using tyrosine as substrate. The synthesis of melanin takes place in melanosomes, lysosome-related organelles. In the early stages of development, melanosomes are membrane-limited vesicles, located in the Golgi-associated endoplasmic reticu-lum. The maturation of melanosomes undergoes four stages. Stage I melanosomes are round without melanin. These are seen in balloon cell melanoma. Stage II through stage IV melanosomes are ellipsoidal with numerous longitudinal fil-aments. Melanin deposits start at stage II. In stage III, mela-nin deposits are prominent. Stage IV melanosomes are fully packed, with melanin obscuring the internal structures. The developing melanosomes, with their content of melanin, are transferred to the neighboring basal keratino-cytes and hair follicular cells. The mechanism of melanin transfer is a complex process, with the end result being phagocytosis of the tip of melanocytic dendrites by the keratinocytes in a process called pigment donation. The number of melanocytes in normal skin is constant in all races, the ratio being one melanocyte for every 4 to 10 basal keratinocytes. Alteration of this ratio is important in the diagnosis of certain pigmented lesions such as malig-nant melanoma of the lentigo maligna type. The color of the skin is determined by the number and size of melanosomes present both in keratinocytes and mela-nocytes-and not by the number of melanocytes. The number of melanocytes decreases with age. As a result, the availability of melanin to keratinocytes diminishes, so the skin becomes tized melanin in keratinocyte Ix19,200). lighter in color and the incidence of skin cancer increases because of the lack of protection that melanin provides. Melanin is both argentaffin and argyrophilic. It can be recognized by Fontana-Masson silver stains. In addition, melanocytes and their dendritic processes are identified by the dopa reaction in histologic slides prepared from frozen sections and in paraffin-embedded sections with immuno-histochemical stains with S-l 00 protein. The latter is highly sensitive but not specific for cells of melanocytic lineage. The S-l 00 protein can be detected in various types of cells, such as Langerhans cells, Schwann cells, eccrine, and apo-crine gland cells. Melanocytes can also be identified with monoclonal antibodies to Melan AlMART-1 (Melanoma Antigens Recognized by T cells-1), a melanocytic differen-tiation marker. The MART-1 antigen is expressed in normal melanocytes, common nevi, Spitz nevi, and malignant mel-anoma. Under normal conditions, the melanoma-associated antigen HMB-45 does not react with adult melanocytes. It is expressed in embryonic melanocytes, hair bulb melanocytes and activated melanocytes. It is usually seen reacting with most melanoma cells, Spitz nevi, the junctional component of common nevi, and dysplastic nevi. An absence or significant decrease in the number of mel a-nocytes is seen in vitiligo. In albinism, there is a defect in the synthesis of melanin, but the number of melanocytes is nor-mal in a skin biopsy. Melanocytic hyperplasia is seen in len-tigo, benign, and malignant melanocytic neoplasms, and as a reaction pattern in a variety of neoplastic and non-neoplastic conditions. In a freckle, there is an increase in pigment donation to adjacent keratinocytes rather than melanocytic hyperplasia. Langerhans Cells Langerhans cells, discovered by Paul Langerhans in 1868, are mobile, dendritic, antigen-presenting cells pres-ent in all stratified epithelium and predominantly in the mid to upper parts of the squamous layer. In H&E-stained sec-elongated nuclei surrounded by a clear space in the mid epidermis. tions, LCs can be suggested as they appear to lie within lacu-nae having darkly stained nuclei with indented, reniform shape at high magnification. As with mela-nocytes, their dendritic nature cannot be seen in routine sections. Langerhans cells can be recognized by histoenzy-matic stains for adenosine triphosphatase; they can also be detected in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue using immunoreactivity for S-l 00 protein and, more specifically, the antibody to the CD 1a antigen. With histoenzymatic and immunohistochemical stains, the extensive dendritic nature of LCs becomes evident. By electron microscopy, LCs show no desmosomes, tonofilaments, or melanosomes. They contain small vesi-cles, multivesicular bodies, lysosomes, and the characteris-tic Birbeck granule, a rod-shape organelle varying in size from 100 nm to 1 urn. It has a centrally striated density and an occasional bulb at one end with a unique tennis racket appearance. Langerhans cells are also present in epithelia, lymphoid organs, and dermis and are increased in the skin in a variety of inflammatory conditions, dendritic processes. Birbeck granules and multisegmented nucleus. such as contact dermatitis, where they can be seen as min-ute nodular aggregates in the epidermis. Langerhans cell granulomatosis is a reactive lesion most commonly seen in bones but also appearing at other sites. Merkel Cells Merkel cells, first described by F.S. Merkel in 1875, are scattered and irregularly distributed in the basal cell layer in the epidermis. They may group together in clusters coupled with enlarged terminal sensory nerve fibers to form slowly adapting mechanoreceptors; within the epidermis, they mediate tactile sensation. They are located in higher concentration in the glabrous skin of the digits, lips, and oral cavity, in the outer root sheath of hair follicles, and in the tactile hair disks. Merkel cells are not recognized in routine histologic preparations. Electron microscopy and immunostaining are required for their identification. By electron micros-copy, MCs are attached to adjacent keratinocytes by des-mosomes. They have scant cytoplasms, invaginated nuclei, a parallel array of cytokeratin filaments in the paranuclear zone, and the characteristic membrane-bound dense core granules that are often, but not always, related to unmyelin-ated neurites. By immunostaining techniques, normal and neoplastic MCs may express neuron-specific enolase, chromogranin, synaptophysin, neural cell adhesion molecule, and various neuropeptides and other substances. However, theof the epidermis. expression of these substances in MCs is heterogeneous and variable. The constant pattern seen in MCs is the pres-ence of paranuclear aggregates of cytokeratins, which include low-molecular weight keratins 8, 18, 19, and 20. The most specific cytokeratin is CK20 because, in addi-tion to MCs, they are expressed in simple epithelial cells and not in adjacent keratinocytes. Pilar Unit The pilar unit is composed of the hair follicle, sebaceous gland, arrector pili muscle, and eccrine and apocrine glands. HAIR FOLLICLE The hair follicle is divided into three segments from top to bottom: the infundibulum, which extends from the opening of the hair follicle in the epider-mis to the opening of the sebaceous duct; the isthmus, which extends from the opening of the sebaceous duct to the insertion of the arrector pili muscle; and the inferior segment, which extends to the base of the follicle. The infe-rior segment is bulbous and encloses a vascularized compo-nent of the dermis referred to as follicular papilla of the hair follicle. The microanatomy and function of the hair follicle is very complex. The cells of the hair matrix differentiate along six cell linings. Beginning from the innermost layer, they are the hair medulla; the hair cortex; the hair cuticle; and three concentric layers of the inner root sheath, papilla. which are the cuticle of the inner root sheath, Hexley's layer and Henle's layer. The inner root sheath of the hair follicle is surrounded by the outer root sheath, which is composed of clear cells. These glycogen-rich cells are seen in some of the neoplasm with hair follicular differentiation (eg, trichi-lemmoma). A PAS-positive basement membrane separates the outer root sheath from the surrounding connective tis-sue. Thus, the hair shaft is formed from the bulb region that occupies the hair follicular canal. Dendritic melanocytes are present only in the upper half of the bulb, whereas inactive melanocytes by the inner root sheath, which contains trichohyalin granules. The outer root sheath is composed of clear cells.are present in the outer root sheath. These melanocytes can become active after injury, migrating into the upper portion of the outer root sheath and to the regenerating epidermis. At the level of the isthmus, the cells of the inner root sheath disintegrate and disappear, whereas the cells of the outer root sheath begin an abrupt sequence of keratiniza-tion. This process is called trichilemmal keratinization. Trichohyalin granules are red in routine H&E-stained sec-tions, as opposed to the blue granules of the keratohyalin of epidermal keratinization and of the epithelium of the fol-licular infundibulum of the hair follicle. The staining fea-tures of these granules permit neoplasms and cysts to be distinguished from either pilar or epidermal origin. Under normal circumstances, microorganisms like Staphylococcus epidermis, yeasts of Pityrosporum (Figure 1.16), and the Demodex folliculorum mites are encountered in the follicular infundibulum. The mantle hair of Pinkus is a hair follicle in which proliferation of basaloid epithelioid cells emanating from sebaceous cells. the infundibulum is seen. Sebaceous proliferation is pres-ent in those cords. The significance of this hair follicle is not known. The hair growth is in lifelong cyclic transformation. Hormones and their receptors play prominent roles in hair cycle regulation. Three phases are recognized: anagen-active growth phase; catagen-involuting phase; and telogen-relative resting phase. The histologic features previously described correspond to the anagen hair. During the catagen phase, mitosis and melanin synthe-sis cease at the level of the hair bulb. The hair bulb is then replaced by a cornified sac formed by retraction of the outer root sheath around the hair bulb, and a club hair is formed. A thick glassy basement membrane surrounds the hair fol-licle. Apoptosis of single cells in the outer root sheath is a characteristic finding during the catagen phase. During the telogen phase, the club hair and its corni-fied sac retract even further to the insertion of the arrec-tor pili muscle, leaving behind the dermal papilla, which is connected to the retracted hair follicle by a fibrous tract. When the cycle is complete, a new ana-gen phase begins with the formation of new hair matrix. The duration of the normal hair cycle varies. The anagen phase is measured in years for the scalp, but it is measured in shorter periods of time for the anagen cycle in other regions of the body. The length of the hair is also related to the amount of the anagen hair. More than 80% ofdermis. the hair present in normal scalp is anagen hair. The catagen phase takes 2 to 3 weeks and the telogen phase may last a few months. The color of normal hair depends on the amount and distribution of the melanin in the hair shaft. Nor-mal human epidermal melanocytes may synthesize both eumelanin and pheomelanin. The melanins in black hair are eumelanin (characterized by the presence of ellip-soidal eumelanosomes), while those in red hair are mainly pheomelanin. Fewer melanosomes are produced in the bulbar melanocytes of blond hair. A relative absence of melanin and fewer melanosomes are seen in gray hair. Multiple internal or external regulatory factors are involved in hair pigmentation. There might be some correlation between tryptophan content and tyrosinase expression with hair color. Another structure related to the pilar unit is the hair or pilar disk. The Haarscheibe is a special-ized spot in close vicinity to hairs. This structure is usually not recognized on routine histologic section. It may pres-ent as an acanthotic elevation of the epidermis, limited by two elongated rete ridges laterally. The epidermis in this area has more Merkel cells in the basal layer, and the dermal component is well vasculized, containing myelin-ized nerve fibers in contact with Merkel cells. It is considered as a highly sensitive, slowly adapting mechano-receptor. toward the center, the differentiated vacuolated cells. SEBACEOUS GLANDS The sebaceous glands are holo-crine glands associated with hair follicles. Their secretions are made up of disintegrated cells. The palms and soles are the only regions devoid of sebaceous glands. Sebaceous glands are prominent in facial skin. They are also seen in the buccal mucosa, vermilion of the lip, prepuce, labia minora, and, at times, in the parotid gland. The sebaceous glands are lobulated structures com-posed of multiple acini in some locations like the head and neck; in other sites, such as chest, they are composed of a single acinus. The periphery of the lobules contains the ger-minative cells, which are cuboidal and flat with large nucle-oli and basophilic cytoplasms without lipid droplets. As dif-ferentiation occurs, several inner layers show lipid droplet accumulation in the cytoplasm until they fill the cell. The more differentiated cells have a char-acteristic multivacuolated cytoplasm. The nucleus is centrally located and scalloped due to the lipid imprints. The more differentiated cells disintegrate and dis-charge the cellular debris into the excretory duct, which opens into the hair follicle in the lower portion of the infundibulum. The excretory duct is short, shared by sev-erallobules, and lined by keratinized squamous epithelium. Within sebaceous glands, the germinative cells express appreciable quantities of keratins. Mature sebocytes dem-onstrate cytoplasmic reactivity for high-molecular weight keratins and epithelial membrane antigen. ECCRINE GLANDS The eccrine glands are the true sweat glands responsible for thermoregulation. They are found in higher concentration in palms, soles, forehead, and axillae and have dual secretory and excretory functions. The secretory portion of an eccrine gland is a convo-luted tube located in the dermis, in the interface with the subcutaneous tissue, and rarely, within the subcutaneoustissue. In cross-sections, it appears that several glandular structures with a central lumen form the secretory coils. These are seen as lobular structures often surrounded by fat even when located within the dermis. Three types of cells are identified in the eccrine coil: clear cells, dark cells, and myoepithelial cells. The clear cells are easily seen H&E-stained sections. They rest directly on the basement membrane and on the myoepi-thelial cells. Clear cells are composed of pale or finely gran-ular cytoplasms with a round nucleus usually seen in the center of the cell. Deep invaginations of the luminal mem-branes of adjacent clear cells form intercellular canaliculi lined with microvilli. The intercellular canaliculi often persist in neoplasms derived from eccrine glands. The clear cells contain abundant mitochondria and variable amounts of PAS-positive, diastase-labile glycogen. The dark cells border the lumen of the glands. Elec-tron microscopy shows that they contain abundant secre-tory granules that have glycogen-staining characteristics. They contain sialomucin (PAS-positive, diastase-resistant mucopolysaccharides) and high concentration of proteins. The dark cells are difficult to identify in rou-tine H&E-stained sections. However, the acid-fast, PASD, and S-l 00 protein stains will highlight the granularity of the cells. The myoepithelial cells are contractile spindle cells that surround the secretory coil. In turn, they are surrounded by a PAS-positive basement membrane. Elastic fibers, fat, and small nerves are present in the adjacent stroma. The excretory component of the eccrine gland is com-posed of three segments: a convoluted duct in close asso-ciation with the secretory unit, a straight dermal component, and a spiral intraepidermal portion, the acrosyringium, which opens onto the skin surface (Figure 1.27). The transition between the secretory and the excretory component is abrupt. Both convoluted and straight dermal ducts are histologically identical. They are narrow tubes with a slit-like lumina lined by double layers of cuboidal cells. The luminal cells have a more granular eosinophilic cytoplasm and a larger round nucleus than the peripheral row of cells. The peripheral cells are rich in mitochondria. The luminal cells produce a layer of tonofilaments near the luminal membrane that are often referred to as "the cuticular border," which is a PASD eosinophilic cuticle. This cuticular border often persists in the eccrine neoplasm (eg, '.' , lial cells. eccrine poroma). There are no myoepithelial cells and periph-eral hyalin basement membrane zone in the eccrine ducts. The intraepidermal segment of the eccrine duct, known as acrosyringium has a unique symmetrical and helicoidal course in the epidermis with its length correlated to the thickness of the epidermis. It consists of a single layer of luminal cells and two or three rows of concentrically ori-ented outer cells. The presence of keratohyalin granules in acrosyringium in the lower levels of the squamous layer indicates that they keratinize independently. The intraepi-dermal lumen is lined by acellular eosinophilic cuticle before keratinization. Melanin granules are absent. ApOCRINE GLANDS The apocrine gland has a coiled secretory portion and an excretory component. The secretory portion is much longer than its eccrine counterpart; and it may reach 200 11min diameter, compared to 20 11mfor the eccrine glands. The secretory glands are located in the subcutaneous fat or in the deep dermis. They are lined by one layer of cuboidal, columnar, tory portion. or flat cells, and an outer layer of myoepithe-lial cells, which is surrounded by a PAS-positive basement membrane. The luminal cells are composed of eosinophilic cytoplasm, which may contain lipid, iron, lipofuscin, PASO granules, and a large nucleus located near the base of the cell. Detached fragments of apical cytoplasm are found in the lumen of the glands. The secretion from apocrine glands releases secretory materials accompanied with loss of part of cytoplasm, although other forms of secretion have been observed, including merocrine (granular con-tents within numerous vesicles are released without loss of cytoplasm) and holocrine type (the entire cell is secreted into the glandular lumen). Similar to the eccrine duct, the excretory com-ponent of the apocrine gland has a double layer of cuboidal cells and keratin filaments are in their cytoplasms, the latter giving the eosinophilic hyalin appearance to the inner lining of the duct. No myoepithelial cells and peripheral basement membrane are identified in the excretory duct. Apocrine glands are always connected to a pilosebaceous follicle. The intrafollicular or intraepidermal portion of the apocrine duct is straight other than the spiral as seen in acrosyringium. Apocrine glands are mostly located in the axillary, ano-genital areas, mammary region, eyelids, and external ear canal, and their presence is characteristic in nevus sebaceous Jadassohn. A third type of sweat gland, the so-called "apocccrine glands" of the human axillae, is composed of a dilated secretory portion that, by electron microscopy, is indistin-guishable from the apocrine glands; however, they retain the intercellular canaliculi, as well as the dark cells of the eccrine glands. The duct does not open in the hair follicle but in the epidermis. These glands, which develop from eccrine glands during puberty, account for as much as 45% of all axillary sweat glands in a young person. Recently, it was reported that the obstruction of intraepidermal apoec-crine sweat ducts by apoeccrine secretory cells might be the possible cause of Fox-Fordyce disease. The dermis is a dynamic, supportive connective tissue har-boring cells, fibrous tissue, and ground substances with adnexal structures and vascular and nerve plexuses run-ning through it. The dermis consists of two zones: the papillary dermis and reticular dermis. The adventitial dermis combines the papillary and the peri-adnexal dermis. The papillary and periadnexal dermis can be recognized by a loose meshwork of thin, poorly organized collagen branching in the papillary dermis and thick and fragmented in the retic-ular dermis. composed of predominantly type III collagen mixed with some type I collagen and a delicate branching network of fine elastic fibers. The papillary dermis also contains abundant ground substance, fibroblasts, and the capillaries of the superficial arterial and venous plexuses. The reticular dermis is thicker than the papillary dermis and is composed of multiple layers of well-organized thick bundles of collagens, predominantly type I collagen, mostly arranged parallel to the surface. These layers are built from overlapping of individual fibers of uniform size. The plates are oriented randomly in different directions. There are also thick elastic fibers with fragmented appearance detected by special elastic tissue stains. Some ground substance and the vessels of the deep plexuses are also pres-ent in the reticular dermis. The resident cells in the dermis mainly include dermal dendritic cells, fibroblasts, and mast cells. Dermal dendritic cells are a group of cells with immunophenotypic and func-tional heterogeneity located in the dermis and possessing a dendritic morphology. There are multiple subsets of dendritic cells. At least three types of dermal dendritic cells are recognized as distinct cell types with unique immuno-phenotype in vivo. 1. Factor XIIIa+ dermal dendrocytes are perivascular in dis-tribution in the papillary dermis and around sweat glands. Dermal dendrocytes, also known as dendrophages, express some markers of mononuclear macrophages and have phagocytic function.2. CD34+ dendritic cells are present in the mid and deep dermis around adnexae. 3. The dermis harbors a true dendritic cell population, also in a perivascular distribution. These are Langer-hans cell-like dendritic cells involved in dermal antigen presentation, expressing HLA-DR and CD1a except for lack of Birbeck granules. Fibroblasts are the dynamic and fundamental cells of the dermis, synthesizing all types of fibers and ground sub-stances. They appear as spindle-shaped or stellate cells, which are not reliably differentiated from other dermal spindle-shaped cells and dendritic cells in H&E-stained sections. Ultrastructurally, they contain prominent, well-developed rough endoplasmic reticulum. Mast cells are derived from bone marrow CD34+ pro-genitor cells and are sparsely distributed in the perivascular and periadnexal dermis. They are recognized by a darkly stained ovoid nucleus and granular cytoplasm, which is highlighted by Giemsa and toluidine blue stains. Mast cells are positive with tryptase and c-kit immunohisto-chemical stains. Mastocytosis is characterized by abnormal growth and accumulation of mast cells in various organs with heterogeneous manifestation. Urticaria pig-mentosa is the most common cutaneous manifestation of mastocytosis. Macrophages are also seen in the normal dermis; they become visible when pigments or other ingested material is present in the cytoplasm of the cells. Besides fibrous tissue and cellular components, the dermis also contains amorphous ground substance filling the spaces between fibers and dermal cells. It mainly con-sists of glycosaminoglycans or acid mucopolysaccharides [the nonsulfated acid mucopolysaccharides (predominantly hyaluronic acid) and, to a lesser degree, sulfated acid muco-polysaccharide]. The ground substance is present in small amounts and is seen as empty spaces between collagen bundles in routine H&E-stained sections; it is also hardly identified with Alcian blue and toluidine blue special stains. In pathologic conditions such as lupus erythematosus, granuloma annulare, and dermal mucinosis, the excessive quantity of ground substance produced can be seen without the aid of special stains as strings of bluish material. Subcutaneous tissue, also called subcutis or hypodermis, is crucial in thermal regulation, insulation, provision of energy, and protection from mechanical injuries. It is composed of mature adipose tissue arranged into lobules. The mature adipocytes within the lobules are round cells rich in cyto-plasmic lipids, which compress the nucleus to the side of the cell membrane. The adipocytes express S-100 protein and vimentin in immunohistochemical stains. These lobules of mature adipocytes are separated by the thin bands of dermal connective tissue that constitute the interlobular septa. Thus, inflammatory changes involving the subcutaneous tissue can be divided into septal pannicu-litis and lobular panniculitis (eg, panniculitis associated with pancreatitis). The large arteries that supply the skin are located in the sub-cutaneous tissue, usually within the interlobular septa and are accompanied by large veins. Smaller arteries, venules, and capillaries constitute the main vasculature seen in the dermis and within the lobules of the subcutaneous fat. A network of these smaller vessels is located in the pap-illary dermis and in the deep reticular dermis. Superficial vascular plexuses separate the papillary dermis from the reticular dermis, whereas the deep vascular plexuses define the boundary between the reticular dermis and subcutaneous tissue. The division of superficial and deep plexuses is important in the classifica-tion and recognition of many inflammatory diseases of the skin in which characteristic infiltrates are located around the superficial, deep, or superficial and deep plexuses. Vasculitis is the inflammatory process that involves the blood vessels. It is important to remember that strict criteria are applied for the diagnosis of cutaneous vasculitis, and they include: the presence of inflammatory cell infil-trate within the vessel wall, and the presence of vascular injury, in a spectrum from edema and extravasations of red blood cells, leukocytoclasis, thrombi within the lumina of these blood vessels to fibrinoid necrosis and/or destructiondamage to the capillary wall. of the blood vessel wall. The presence of fibri-noid necrosis of the vessel wall is essential for the diagnosis of true vasculitis. Perivascular inflammation alone is not a sign of vasculitis. Mainly in the acral skin, special arteriovenous anas-tomosing structures known as glomera are present in the reticular dermis. Each glomus is composed of an arterial seg-ment connected directly with venous segments. Each Sucquet-Hoyer canal is surrounded by four to six layers of glomus cells, which are considered as vascular smooth muscle cells serving as a sphincter. Glomus appears to be involved in thermal regulation. The lymphatics of the skin accompany the venules and are also located in the deep and superficial plexuses. Unless valves are seen within these vessels, their recogni-tion in routine sections is impossible. Under normal condi-tions, they are surrounded by a cuff of elastic fibers. Large nerve bundles are seen in the subcutaneous fat and in the deep reticular dermis; however, small nerve fibers are present throughout the skin, reaching the papil-lary dermis. In sections of the palm and sole, some sensory nerves form nerve ending organs. Meissner corpuscles are seen in the papillary dermis, which is composed of several parallel layers of Schwann cells containing an axon; they function as rapid mechanical receptors for the sense of touch. In weight-bearing areas, the Vater-Pacini corpuscles consist of concentrically arranged Schwann cells with an axon and are located in the deep dermis and subcutaneous fat. They serve as receptors for sense of deep pressure and vibration. Smooth muscle is represented in the skin by the arrec-tor pili muscles, which arise in the connective tissue of the dermis and insert into hair follicles below the sebaceous glands. Melanocytes of congenital nevus are often seen within the arrector pili muscle. Smooth muscle is also seen in the skin of external genitalia and in the areolae. Strands of striated muscle are found in the skin of the neck, face, and particularly the eyelids as muscle of expreSSIOn. 