Very few studies of the normal ultrastructural morphology of the nail exist, because of varied difficulties: achieving proper fixation and adequate penetration of epoxy resin into the nail plate; obtaining ultrathin sections; and securing the high-voltage elec-tron beam necessary to penetrate through extraordinarily hard tissue and availability of 100 to 200 kV machines. The proximal end of the human toenail is composed of several layers of epithelial cells. Hashimoto and coworkers make the distinction between a proximal dorsal, apical, and ventral matrix, although noting that there are few differences between them. They found that the cells composing the proximal matrix were: relatively small, elongated basal cells attached to the basal lamina; rela-tively large, round, or polygonal squamous cells filling the more central portion of the matrix; melanocytes; Langerhans cells; and MCs. Moreover, there exists a system of attachment to the dermis, showing the surface of the basal cell with frequent finger-like elongations that interdigitate with the papil-lary dermis. This results in the formation of numerous micropapillae, with bundles of very fine fibrils. The subjacent dermis of the matrix zone shows poor vascularity and scarce collagen fibers, with abundant basic matrix. The basal cells are very active, with frequent mitotic fig-ures. They showed an elongated nucleus and cytoplasm with numerous, slender projections intricately interdigi-tated with neighboring cells. Tonofibrils were also seen as a perinuclear ring with an interposition of the nuclear clear zone in which the majority of mitochondria, transferred melanosomes, and occasional centrioles are located. The suprabasal matrix cells are also round, with frequent mitotic figures. Generally, the long axes of these cells were oriented axiodistally, suggesting the direction of their migration. Large intercellular spaces were often seen between these supra-basal cells. The extensive interdigitation of the peripheral villi as seen in the basal cells disappeared and multiple desmo-somal junctions alone connected these cells. Abundant desmosomes can be seen in the intermediate layers with high condensations of intermediate fibrils. The aspect of the intermediate layer of the nail matrix is similar to the upper layers of the normal epidermis. The cells have Ultrastructural appearance of the dermoepidermal junction of the intermediate matrix. The basal layer shows an accen-tuated digitiform distribution, with multiple intermediate filaments. layer. They are bigger and more abundant than in a normal epidermis. lost their organelles, and their cytoplasm is nearly filled with tonofibrils. For this reason, the keratinization process is very abrupt, passing from three to four cellular lines to completely keratinized corneocytes.