In order to adequate a proper histologic evaluation of the nail area, it is important to understand not only the normal nail anatomy but also the melanocytic density of nail unit epithelium. The nail matrix possesses melanocytes, just as the hair matrix does. The matrix of Caucasian patients con-tains sparse, poorly developed melanocytes (Figures 2.17, 2.18). It is difficult to observe melanocytes in the proximal matrix zone using light microscopy, but their number the ventral portion of the nail fold and the dorsal and the intermediate matrix. is progressively increased distally. Nevertheless, the num-ber of melanocytes is always less than in the normal skin. There are distinct differences in the distribution of melanocytes in adult skin and nail matrix. Irnmunostain-ing of nail matrix melanocytes revealed that they are not singly interspersed between the keratinocytes of the basal layer, but that they are frequently arranged in small clusters thotic epithelium, with germinative basal cells keratinocytes and scarce melanocytes.abrupt keratinization. among the suprabasallayers of the nail matrix. A similar pattern of distribution of melanocytes has been described in fetal skin and in fetal skin equivalents, in which the melanocytes are grouped and localized both basally and suprabasally. The suprabasallocation of nail matrix melano-cytes may be a consequence of differences in the distribu-tion of adhesion molecules in the nail epithelium. Higashi and Saito demonstrated that the number of melanocytes and the intensity of the dopa reaction in them were much greater in the distal than the proximal matrix. The melanocyte count in normal epidermis was reported to be 400 per2.784 mm 2, while the range was 208 to576 in the distal areas of the intermediate nail matrix. Ultraviolet rays and trauma are factors that could influ-ence a more extensive distribution in the distal zone. In some races such as Japanese, the matrix contains several hundred well-developed melanocytes per millimeter. Also, it seems that melanocytes of the nail matrix in Oriental Nail Area Epithelium Granular Layer Horny End Product Proximal nail Similar to Present Cuticle fold normal skin or slightly acanthotic Matrix Acanthotic Absent Nail plate Nail bed Flat Absent Lower layer of the nail plate Hyponychium Acanthotic Present Horny layer in the under surface of the distal nail, similar to cuticle layer in the pulp of the finger in contrast with the absence of pigmenta-tion in the nail matrix. races have larger dendritic processes than Caucasians. Pig-ment, therefore, arrives in the nail plate as in the keratin-ized cells of the stratum corneum and hair cortex. Nail pigmentation is most evident in African Americans in whom it is commonly seen as longitudinal linear streaks, although this anomalous distribution of pigmentation can also be seen in pathologic states, such as subungual pigmented nevi and melanomas in the matrix zone. Abundant melanosomes of these subjects have a protective UV effect, since varia-tions in racial pigmentation are due to the number and size of melanosomes produced. keratin antibody, are scarce in number.Langerhans and Merkel Cells Langerhans and Merkel cells have also been identified in the matrix although their signification is unknown. Studies of the Langerhans cells in the nail matrix are almost absent. Nevertheless, interesting studies about the MCs have been recently published. Moll and Moll studied the MCs in ontogenesis of human nails, using immunohistochemi-cal stains with cytokeratins IS and 20 in human fetuses of 9 to 22 weeks of life. These authors have concluded that the number of MCs are detected very early in the matrix primordium. However, MCs were found to decrease in number with aging of the fetuses: At 12 to 15 weeks, MCs were only seen in the proximal nail fold, and were essentially absent from the epithelium of the ventral matrix and nail bed in the adult. Lunula The intermediate matrix continues forward with a visible, white half-moon-shaped area called lunula. The lunula is shown to be linked to a well-defined area in the underlying dermis with a specific histology and microvascularization. Although always present, it cannot be seen in some fingers but is most visible in the thumbs. The typical white color is related to some histologic features of this area. Lewin confirmed that the opacity of the proximal nail plate, the relative avascularity of the subepidermal layer, and the loose texture of the dermal collagen are responsible for its color. Samman thought that it was a combination of incomplete keratinization in the nail plate and loose con-nective tissue in the underlying tissue. Zaias believed that the nail plate would be thinner in the lunula because it coincides with the keratogenous zone, the zone of cytoplas-mic condensation in the matrix just before cells form the nail plate. The length of the subnail matrix area distal to the free edge of the proximal nail fold is highly correlated with the length of the lunula. Other special histologic features of this zone of the matrix, including a different chemical composition of the nail plate and a different distribution of the dermal fibers, have been related to the typical white color of the lunula, although not one of these factors has been confirmed. We do not even know the exact function of the lunula. Nail Bed The nail bed begins where the intermediate matrix ends, and some authors prefer to designate the ventral matrix as the site. A histologic appreciation of the end of the intermedi-ate matrix and the beginning of the nail bed is very easy. The nail bed epidermal layer is usually a flat epithelium no more than three- or four-cell thick, without melanocytes (Figures 2.19, 2.20). The transition zone from living keratinocytes to dead ventral nail plate cells is abrupt, occurring in the space of one horizontal cell layer, very similar to what occurs in the Henle layer of the internal root sheath of the hair follicle. During its early development, the nail bed exhibits a keratinization process differing from the adult's, with a upper zone. prominent granular layer at 17 to 20 weeks of development. However, after birth, the nail bed, like the matrix, keratinizes without a granular layer. It is less active than the matrix, with a longer turnover time than the matrix and skin. A thin parakeratotic keratin is produced, apparently dragged for-ward by the nail plate growing over it, rather than becoming incorporated into the nail. In the nail bed, the dermis fits into the longitudinal and parallel nail bed ridges in tongue-and-groove fashion. The fine capillaries of the nail bed run in these parallel dermal ridges, and disruption of these accounts for the splinter hemorrhages commonly seen in normal and disease states. There is no fat tissue in the nail bed, although scat-tered dermal fat cells may be visible microscopically. The nail bed epidermis moves distally toward the hypo-nychium. The cells that appear to be the germinative popula-active germinative cells atthe basal layer. In the upper dermis, it is pos-sible to observe larger vessels than in the normal skin. tion lie near the lunula, so close together that they may be confused as belonging to one population. The distal move-ment from this position may also help explain why during development, the nail bed epidermis seems to lose keratohy-aline granule layers from a proximal-to-distal direction con-comitantly with the formation of the primitive nail plate. The nail bed shows a granular layer in some pathologic states, in which the activity in the nail bed is greatly increased, such as occurs in onychogryphosis, pachyonychia congenita, and psoriasis; in these cases, the horny cells produced push the nail plate upward and give it a claw-like appearance. Histochemical studies of the nail bed prove the pres-ence of bound phospholipids in the nail bed epidermis. Bound cysteine can be detected in the transi-tion zones: Acid phosphatase and nonspecific esterase are absent in the dorsal and intermediate zones. Matrix Nail Bed Nail Plate Nail Folds-Hyponychium Basal Malpighian Basal Malpighian Keratinized Dorsal Intermediate Layer Layer Ventral Intermediate Dorsal Layer Layer Layer Dermis Glycogen ± ± Mucopolysaccharide + + ± + ++ + ± + ± + Ribonucleic acid + + + + + + Sulfhydryl groups ++ ++ + + + Acid phosphatase + ± ± + ++ + + + Alkaline phosphatase + + Amylophosphorylase + + + Cholinesterase + "Baran R.Dawber RPR,eds. Diseases af the Nail and Their Management. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific; 1984:1-21. Jarrett A, Spearman RI. The histochemistry of the human nail. Arch Dermatal 1966;94:652-657. Immunohistochemical studies have demonstrated that nail bed expressed all the target antigens found in the normal nonappendageal basement membrane. In particular, there was normal expression of the epidermal-associated antigens, the 220 and 180 kDa bullous pemphi-goid antigens and the alpha-6 beta-4 integrin. There was also normal expression of the lamina lucida antigens LH39, GB3, and laminin. Sinclair et al. pointed out that the dermal-associated components, namely the 285 kDa linear immunoglobulin A antigen, the extracellular matrix glycoproteins, chondroitin sulfate, type VII collagen and its closely associated proteins, and the poorly characterized antigen for LH24 and LH39 were all normally expressed. All the former data were also found in the proximal nail fold, nail matrix, and hyponychium. The presence of antimicrobial peptides in nails, mainly cathelicidin LL- 37, demonstrated by immunostaining, with activity against relevant nail pathogens may account for the ability of the nail unit to resist infection in the absence of direct access to the cellular immune system. Hyponychium The most distal portion of the nail bed is the hyponychium, representing the union between the nail bed and the finger-tips; its histologic characteristics are rather peculiar. This transition zone presents a notable change of appearance after a few millimeters because the epithelium undergoes keratinization similar to that of the epidermis. The result is marked acanthosis and papillomatosis with the crests oriented almost horizontally; this is associated with normal appendages. An area of abun-dant keratohyaline granules is present, and the horny layer produced tends to accumulate under the free edge of the nail plate, producing a keratin horn similar to the cuticle. The hyponychium is the first site of keratinization in the nail unit and of all epidermis in the embryo zone is the great accumulation of keratin under the distal nail plate.layer under the nail plate and the visible granular layer. The epithelium shows an acanthotic aspect, with transversal papillae.. The function of this anatomical formation is to render the nail bed impermeable to protect it from external agents. If this structure fails, dermatophyte invasions will be frequent, producing onychomycosis. Terry describes an intermediate zone between the nail bed and the hyponychium, which he called onychoder-mal band. Terry speculated that this area, normally from 0.5 to 1.5 mm wide, had a blood supply different from the remainder of the nail bed, a fact later confirmed by other authors. For this reason, the color is paler than the pink nail bed and has a slightly amber tinge with a translu-cent quality. The onychodermal band occasionally changes its color, especially in cirrhosis and other chronic diseases. Lateral Nail Folds The lateral nail folds have a structure similar to the adjacent skin but are normally devoid of dermatoglyphic markings and pilosebaceous glands. Acanthosis and papillomatosis of the epithelium are present, similar to that of the hypo-nychium. Keratinization within the nail folds proceeds by keratohyalin formation in the granular layer. The epidermis lining of these grooves does not contribute to the formation of the nail plate, except in the most proximal portions of the grooves, where it becomes continuous with the epidermis of the proximal nail fold or matrix. and the presence of eccrine glands in the middle dermis (cytokeratin antibody). When the lateral border of the nail plate pathologically breaks this fold, abundant granulation tissue forms, consti-tuting the onychocryptosis, a frequent pathologic alteration of the great toenail. IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY OF THE NAil UNIT Nail Plate The cornified envelope of the epidermis is formed by sev-eral precursor proteins, including involucrin, keratolinin, loricrin, pancornulin, sciellin, 195 kDa protein, keratin, and Ventral proximal nail fold: supra~sal ~~ K1, K10, K16, K6 ~ basal pattern of LH6 Matrix tip: ~K18basal pattern of LH6 ermal K14 suprabasal K1, K10, Ha-1Small clusters of cells in some casesfilaggrin. Baden and Kvedar have demonstrated that in the nail, monoclonal antibodies show the presence of pan-cornulin in the nail fold and proximal matrix, while sciellin was detected in the nail fold, matrix, and bed. Similarly, in studies of the human nails, the use of immunofluorescence, immunoblotting, and peR have shown that trichohyalin, a 200 kDa protein of the inner root sheath and medulla, was present in the ventral matrix, but not in the nail bed; a few scattered cells stained for trichohyalin were observed within the nail plate. Heid et al. studied the keratin expression patterns observed in the human fetal nail matrix and revealed that the nail develops from both skin- and hair-type differenti-ating cells. Kitahara and Ogawa demonstrated that AE1/AE3 antibody reacted with the dorsal nail matrix. As AE1/AE3 antibody recognized hard keratins which are characteristics of differentiation in hair, these results show that adult nail develops in such a way that hair-type differ-entiation is confined to the ventral nail matrix, supporting Heid et al. results. Keratinocytes Expression of keratins in the different compartments within the nail unit has been demonstrated in some recent articles. The characteristics of the different keratins found at different sites could be relevant to our understand-ing of the biology of the normal nail and changes seen in several diseases. Analysis of human nail plate by gel electrophoresis demonstrates a range of keratins of two characteristic types, as we commented formerly (see before "Genetic and nail keratins"). 'Soft' or epithelial keratins represent the major Nail bed: suprabasal Wl/QI' K16, K17~ panepidermal ~ K6, K14, LH6 ~ C46 antibody to K7/K17 ~'\ K17 normal expression of K1, K10,K14, LH6 in digit pulp De Berker et al.. structural intermediate filament isolated from human skin, but constitute only 10 to 20% of the keratin found in nail. 'Hard' keratins, characteristic of hair and nail differ-entiation, which exist in the same acid-base heterodimer configuration as soft epithelial keratins, but have additional resilience. Molecular classification of hard keratin proteins on gel electrophoresis describes eight major and two minor proteins, all of which are probably present in human nail. This family has been extended by genome analysis into at least seven type I Ha keratins and six type II Hb keratins. Further keratins and their isoforms are likely be discovered. In addition to the hard keratins, epithelial keratins isolated from the nail plate include Kl, KI0, K5, K14, K6, K16, K17, and K19 from fetal nail. Ha 1 is one of the maj or hard keratins found in nail, where hard keratin represents SOto 90% of nail keratin. Pan-cytokeratin antibodies can be used to demonstrate keratins in nail. AE-l1 AE- 3 is a keratin cocktail that detects CKl-S, 10, 14-16, and 1. The most evident positive for CK in nail region is to CK5-S and CK-14 stains. Cytokeratin IS, 19, and 20 are poorly expressed in the nail matrix. It is very interesting that CK- KLI stain is very positive to the dorsal nail matrix epithelium but negative in the ventral nail matrix. Epithelial membrane antigen stains, can demonstrate some isolated positive areas in the nail bed. In the same way, claudin-l is a major component of the tight junction structure and plays an important role in cell-cell adhesion. This former stain isvery positive, expressed in the upper layers of the nail matrix epithelium. Since Berker et al. have found a low expression of the differentiation-specific keratins Kl and KI0 in the keratogenous zone of the ventral matrix, this feature was not demonstrated by other authors. Keratins K6, K16, and K17 are normally found in hyperproliferative epider-mis, such as in psoriasis or in wound healing. Studies of proliferative compartments in the nail unit suggest that the nail bed is not a major contributor to the nail plate. It may be that the ventral aspect of the proximal nail fold and not the nail bed is the source of nail plate K6 and K16, and the matrix and not the nail bed provides K17. K14 is synthesized in the basal layer and K14 protein was detected throughout the epithelium, as has been noted in other tissues. However, the marker of basal keratin conforma-tion, LH6, was also seen throughout the nail bed. This is unusual and may reflect the absence of the expression of the suprabasal keratins Kl and KI0, which are thought to obscure the epitopes detected by LH6 in normal stratified epithelium. This persistence of LH6 antigen is also seen in the outer root sheath of the hair follicle, which is also the site of expression of K16, K6, and K17, support-ing the analogy drawn between the nail bed and outer root sheath. However, expression of Kl and KI0 is found to a degree in the upper outer root sheath superficial to the level of the sebaceous gland. The absence of Kl and Kl 0 from the nail bed correlates with a reduction in terminal differentiation. Lack of cor-nification is also seen in mucosal epithelium in combina-tion with the presence of K16 and K17. However, mucosal . "~~...'.... FIGURE 2.25 Pan-keratin AE-l/AE-3 in normal nail matrix. FIGURE 2.27 CK-14 immunostain. Observe the intense positive expressed in the nail matrix. nail matrix. the ventral nail matrix epithelium. differentiation is defined by the presence of K4 and K13, which was absent in the nail bed. The exact signifi-cance of these keratins remains to be established. Additional molecular studies have demonstrated the homology between hair and nail keratins. Retinoicacid-inducible gene-l was originally identified as an orphan G-protein coupled receptor induced by reti-noic acid. Three highly homologous oGPCRs (GPRC5B, GPRC5C, and GPRC5D) have since been classified into the RAIG 1family. Inoue et al. studied the unique FIGURE 2.31 Claudin-l is very positive in the upper layers of the nail matrix epithelium. tissue distribution of GPRCSD and its mechanism of expression by in situ hybridization in hair shafts, nail, and filiform papillae of the tongue. They found that GPRCSD is expressed in differentiating cells that produce hard keratin, including cortical cells of the hair shaft, the keratogenous zone of the nail, and in a central region of the filiform papil-lae of the tongue. The GPRCSD transcript is expressed in hair follicles during mid and late anagen, and catagen but not at telogen and early anagen phases. The differentiation inducer, all-trans retinoic acid, induces GPRCSD expres-sion in cultured hair bulb cells. Since the tissue distribu-tion of GPRCSD indicates a relationship with hard keratins that constitute the major structural proteins of hard epi-thelial tissues, they investigated the effect of GPRCSD on acid hard keratins. Analyses of cultured cells showed that transient overexpression resulted in suppression of Ha3 and stimulation of Ha4 hair keratin gene expression. The expression was maintained in the hair follicles of winged helix nude-deficient mice, suggesting that this gene is regulated by a signal pathway different from that of hair keratin synthesis. These data provide a framework for understanding the molecular mechanisms of GPRCSD function in hard keratinization. In the expression of hard keratin by matrical keratino-cytes is primordial the influence of matrical fibroblasts. Okazaki et al. demonstrated that even in non-nail-matrical keratinocyte expression of hard keratin could be induced by nail-matrical fibroblasts. These investigators constructed three different skin equivalents: ventral keratinocytes were cocul-tured with ventral fibroblasts; ventral keratino-cytes were cocultured with nail-matrical fibroblasts (group B); and nail-matrical keratinocytes were cocultured with ventral fibroblasts.Immunohistochemical exami-nations with anti-hard keratin antibody revealed hard keratin expression in groups Band C. HKN-7-positive cells were distributed continuously in the entire epithelial strata or in the suprabasallayer in group B, whereas HKN-7-positive cells were distributed spottily in group C. This study indicated extrinsic hard keratin induction in non-nail-matrical keratinocytes by nail-matrical fibroblasts and suggests that non-nail-matrical epidermal grafts may be effective in the treatment of de-epithelized nail injuries. In addition, it is possible that lost nails could be reconstructed with grafts of "tissue-engineered" nail equivalent. Human carcinoembryonic antigen and CEA-related molecules play an important role in adhesion of the nail plate to the nail bed. Egawa et al. demonstrated that a CEA family antigen with NCA-like immu-noreactivity was strongly expressed in the nail. A strong expression of the NCA-like antigen was only seen in the keratinocytes distributed in the upper epithelial cell lay-ers of the major central portions of the nail bed, to which the nail plate is firmly bonded; expression was stronger at the more distal portion of the nail bed, and was absent in the nail matrix, the hyponychium, and the lateral folds.The results are interesting because the nail plate is firmly bonded to the nail bed, less so proximal to the matrix mar-gin, and it has been shown that the bed epithelium travels at the same speed as the nail plate, indicating that the bed epithelium has a proximal site of origin and a distal end. Plasminogen activator inhibitor type 2 was detected in the differentiating cells of the matrix and nail bed. These authors, using transfected cell lines that express high levels of PAI-2, have suggested that this inhibi-tor may confer protection against programmed cell death. This consistent, selective distribution of PAI-2 in the post-mitotic, maturing cells prior to terminal keratinization and death suggests that PAI-2 may be considered as a dif-ferentiation marker for many epithelial cell types, and PAI-2 is appropriately positioned to protect epithelial cells from premature demise. 