Basic knowledge of the embryology of the skin is important because it helps to understand some post-natal pathology. The ectoderm gives rise to epidermis and its append-ages. The mesoderm provides the mesenchymal elements of the dermis and subcutaneous fat. Developmental abnormalities in the ectoderm produces amongst others a variety of syndromes grouped under the umbrella term of ectodermal dysplasias. Initially, the embryo is covered by a single layer of ecto-dermal cells which by the sixth to eighth week of develop-ment differentiates into two layers, the basal layer and an overlying second layer called periderm. Because of mitotic activity, the basal layer becomes the germinative layer and additional rows of cells develop from this proliferating layer, forming a multilayer of cells between ectoderm and periderm. By the twenty-third week, keratinization has taken place in the upper stratum, and the cells of the peri-derm have already been shed. Of interest is that the CD30 antigen considered to be restricted to tumor cells of Hodgkin's disease and anaplastic large cell lymphoma par-ticipates in the terminal differentiation of many fetal tissues including the skin. Cell junction proteins are expressed in the early two-layered embryonic epidermis and as early as the eighth week of estimated gestational age. By the end of the first trimester, the dermal-epidermal junction with its compo-nents is ultrastructurally similar to that of mature skin. Thus, the characteristic neonatal epidermis is well devel-oped by the fourth month. Keratinocytes constitute 90 to 95% of the cells in the epidermis. The rest of the epidermal cells are nonkerati-nocytes, and they include melanocytes, Langerhans cells, and Merkel cells. The nonkeratinocytes are seen in the epidermis of 8- to 10-week-old embryos. The precursor cells of melanocytes migrate from the neural crest to the dermis and then to the epidermis, where they differentiate into melanocytes during the first 3 months of development. During this migration, melanocytes can reside in other organs and tissues. Ultrastructurally, recognizable melano-somes in melanocytes may be seen in the fetal epidermis at 8 to 10 weeks of gestational age. Langerhans cells are derived from the CD34+ hemato-poietic precursor cell of the bone marrow. The characteristic cytoplasmic marker, the Birbeck granule, is seen ultrastruc-turally in 10-week-old embryos. The expression of a more characteristic immunohistochemical marker, CD 1a, is completed by 12 to 13 weeks of estimated gestational age. Merkel cells can also be seen in the epidermis of 8- to 10-week-old embryos. The origin of Merkel cells is debat-able. Some have suggested a neural crest derivation, whereas others suggest epidermal origin through a process of differentiation from neighboring keratinocytes. Merkel cells in the epidermis are initially numerous and later diminish with increasing gestational age. The dermis is derived from the pnmitive mesenchyme underlying the surface ectoderm. The papillary and reticular dermis is recognized by 15 weeks of intrauterine life. As described by Breathnach, three types of cells are recognized in 6- to 14-week-old embryos. Type I cells are stellate-dendritic cells with long slender processes. These are the most numerous primitive mesenchymal cells and proba-bly give rise to the endothelial cells and the pericytes. Type II cells have less extensive cell processes; the nucleus is round and the cytoplasm contains large vacuoles. They are classi-fied as phagocytic macrophages of yolk-sac origin. Type III cells are round with little or no membrane extension, but they contain numerous vesicles, some with an internal con-tent suggestive of granule-secretory type of cells. These cellscould be melanoblasts on their way to the epidermis, or they could be precursors of mast cells; Schwann cells associated with neuroaxons, but lacking basal lamina, are also identi-fied during this period. The type II mesenchymal cells are rarely seen after week 14 of development. However, another cell type with ultra-structure of histiocyte or macrophage is frequently seen dur-ing this time. Well-formed mast cells are also seen in the dermis. In 14 to 21 weeks of development, fibroblasts are numer-ous and active. Fibroblasts are recognized as elongated spin-dle cells with abundant rough endoplasmic reticulum. They are the fundamental cell of the dermis and synthesize all types of fibers and ground substance. Type IIIcollagen fibers are abundantly present in the matrix of fetus, whereas type I collagen fibers are more prominent in adult skin. Elastic fibers appear in the dermis after the collagen fiber during the twenty-second week of gestational age; and, by week 32, a well-developed network of elastic fibers is formed in the dermis. Initially, the dermis is organized into somites, but soon this segmental organization ends and the dermis of the head and neck and extremities organizes into dermatomes along the segmental nerves that are being formed. From the twenty-fourth week to term, fat cells develop in the subcuta-neous tissue from the primitive mesenchymal cells. Most epithelial cells of skin appendages derive from fol-licular epithelial stem cells localized in the basal layer of epidermis at the prominent bulge region of the develop-ing human fetal hair follicles. Furthermore, such multipo-tent stem cells may represent the ultimate epidermal stem cell. In 10-week-old embryos, mesenchymal cells of the developing dermis interact with epidermal basal cells. These epidermal cells grow both downward to the dermis and upward through the epidermis to form the opening of the hair canal. As the growing epithelial cells reach the subcutaneous fat, the lower portion becomes bulbous and partially encloses the mesenchymal cells descending with them to form the dermal papillae of the hair follicle, this structure plays an important role in the future processes of hair follicle regeneration. The descending epider-mal cells around the dermal papillae constitute the matrix cells from which the hair layers and inner root sheath will develop. The outer root sheath derives from downward growth of the epidermis. The first hairs appear by the end of the third gestational month as lanugo hair around the eyebrow and the upper lip. The lanugo hair is shed around the time of birth. The developing hair follicle gives rise to the sebaceous and apocrine glands. The sebaceous glands originate as epithelial buds from the outer root sheath of the hair follicles and are developed at approximately the thirteenth to fifteenth gestational weeks. Differentiated sebaceous glands with a hair protruding through the skin surface are present at the eighteenth week of gestational age. They respond to maternal hormones and are well developed at the time of birth. The apocrine glands also develop as epithelial buds from the outer sheath of the hair follicles in 5- to 6-month-old fetuses and continue into late embryonic life as long as new hair follicles develop. The eccrine glands develop from the fetal epidermis independent of the hair follicles. Initially, they are seen as regularly spaced undulations of the basal layer. At 14 to 15 weeks, the tips of the primordial eccrine glands have reached the deep dermis, forming the eccrine coils. At the same time, the eccrine epithelium grows upward into the epidermis. The primordial eccrine epithelium acquires a lumen by the seventh to eighth fetal month, and thus the first eccrine unit is formed. Both ducts and secretory portions are lined by two layers of cells. The two layers in the secretory segment undergo further differentiation; the luminal cells into tall columnar secretory cells, and the basal layer into secretory cells or myoepithelial cells. The first glands are formed on the palms and soles by the fourth month, then in the axillae in the fifth month, and finally on the rest of the hairy skin.