From a practical point of view, the pathology of peripheral nerves falls into two main categories: peripheral neurop-athies, which are diagnosed and treated by physicians and for which an elective nerve or muscle biopsy may be per-formed as a diagnostic procedure rather than as a therapeu-tic exercise, and tumors and traumatic lesions, which are removed surgically mainly as a therapeutic measure to alleviate symptoms. For the diagnosis of peripheral neuropathies, a detailed knowledge of the structure, immunohistochemistry and ultrastructure of peripheral nerves and clinicopathological correlations is essential. The diagnosis of tumors and trau-matic lesions, conversely, relies more on identifying the cel-lular components within the lesion and their interrelation-ships. This chapter, therefore, concentrates first on how to identify different cellular components in normal peripheral nerves, and second, on how knowledge of the normal struc-Myelin 273 Schmidt-Lanterman Clefts or Incisures IS-L I)275 Nodes of Ranvier 275 Unmyelinated Axons 276 CORRELATION OF NORMAL HISTOLOGY WITH THE PATHOLOGY OF PERIPHERAL NERVES 278 Handling and Preparation of Peripheral Nerve Biopsy and Autopsy Specimens 278 Peripheral Neuropathies 279 General Pathology of Peripheral Nerves 279 Axonal Degeneration and Regeneration 279 Segmental Demyelination and Remyelination 281 Hypertrophic Neuropathy 282 Traumatic Lesions of Peripheral Nerve 282 Tumors of the Peripheral Nervous System 284 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 288 REFERENCES 288 ture of peripheral nerves can be used to identify and assess pathological lesions . DEVELOPMENT OF THE PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM The first anatomical evidence of nervous system differentia-tion is the neural plate, which develops as a thickened spe-cialized area in the mid-dorsal ectoderm of the late gastrula stage of the developing embryo. This zone later becomes depressed along the axial midline to form a neural groove that folds inward to form the neural tube. Before fusion is com-pleted, groups of cells become detached from the lateral folds of the neural plate to form the neural crests. Anteriorly, neural crests are located at the level of the presumptive diencepha-lon and extend backward along the whole neural tube. In the peripheral nervous system, the neural crest is the source of neurons and satellite cells in the autonomic and sensory ganglia and Schwann cells; ectodermal placodes may also give rise to ganglion cells in the cranial region. Migrating pluripotent neural crest cells and their sub-sequent development is determined and progressively lim-ited, perhaps by the inductive effect of neuregulins and their receptors erbB2 and erbB3, by environmental factors and by relations with other cell types. The transcrip-tion factor Soxl0, that is initially expressed in the earli-est migrating neural crest cells, appears to be intimately involved in the development of Schwann cells from the neural crest. Interestingly melanoblasts also express Soxl0 and it has recently been suggested that Schwann cell precursors associated with nerve endings could be the source of melanocytes. This could explain on the one hand, the association between alterations in skin pigmenta-tion and neurological disorders as observed in patients with Neurofibromatosis type 1, and on the other hand the presence of melanin in some schwannomas. Many of the events that occur during the later stages of development of peripheral nerves are recapitulated during the regeneration that follows nerve damage in postnatal life. Developing neuroblasts of the dorsal root ganglia (posterior sensory root ganglia) extend neurites both centrally into the neural tube and toward the periphery. Developing motor neu-rons in the anterior lateral parts of the neural tube extend their neurites toward the periphery. Schwann cells derived from the neural crest become associated with the developing peripheral nerves and eventually form myelin around many of the axons. The proximal portions of the anterior horn cell axons and the central axons of the sensory ganglion cells are myelinated within the neural tube by oligodendrocytes. GROWTH OFAXONS One of the major questions that has been raised is how do neuronal processes grow over long distances and arrive at spe-cific terminal regions. Genetic determinants, growth factors, and the extracellular matrix appear to play an important role in the appropriate guidance of neuronal processes. In 1909, Ram6n y Cajal proposed the concept of neurotrophic sub-axons arising from the anterior horn cell are initially myelinated by oligodendrocytes and then pass into the anterior root to be myelinated by Schwann cells. Sensory nerve axons pass into the dorsal root ganglion IDRG) and the central extension of the sen-sory neuron passes via the dorsal root into the spinal cord. Arachnoid appears to be continuous with the perineurium of the peripheral nerve. Oura extends from the spinal cord to coat the roots within the intervertebral foramen, and is continuous with the epineurium.ostances to explain the directionality and specificity of axonal growth in the developing nervous system. But it was not until the 1960s that nerve growth factor was discovered by R Levi-Montalcini and S Cohen as a target-derived neurotrophic factor that supports the survival and differentiation of sensory and autonomic ganglia in the peripheral nervous system. Genes encoding NGF are located on the proximal short arm of chromosome 1. NGF is a protein composed of three subunits-alpha, beta, and gamma-but only the beta NGF has nerve growth promoting activity.Beta-NGF in humans is a 14,500 dalton polypeptide, gamma NGF is an arginyl esterase, whereas the function of the alpha subunit is not known. Other substances that participate in axon growth are members of the NGF family [such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor]; neurotrophins 3, 4/5 and 6 (NT-6); semaphoring-3A, neuropilin-l and ephrin. The tips of growing axons possess multiple surface receptors for soluble and bound molecules that provide information for the axons' growth course. NGF interacts with the NGF recep-tor on the surface of the axon and promotes motility of the growing tip of the axon by interaction with the cytoskeleton of the cell. Mitochondria, neurotubules, neurofilaments, actin filaments, and some cisternae of smooth endoplasmic reticulum are incorporated into the axonal growth cone by axoplasmic flow. In addition to its growth promoting proper-ties, NGF also promotes the early synthesis of neurotransmit-ters and stimulates myelination. Schwann cells in the developing nerve produce NGF and possess NGF receptors on their surface membranes, but expression of these receptors diminishes markedly as the peripheral nerve matures. As NGF binds to Schwann cell receptors and becomes concentrated on the surface of the primitive Schwann cell, it provides a chemotactic stimulus for growing axons. Failure of trophic interactions between the target organ and its innervation may result in nerve dysfunction. Indeed, cases of human neuropa-thies have been attributed to deficiency of neurotrophic fac-tors; important data that provide a rational basis for the clini-cal use of neurotrophic agents in peripheral neuropathies. The extracellular matrix also plays an important role in axonal growth and guidance. The tip of the growing axon Skn DRG Sensory p otor o has receptors for adhesion to extracellular substances such as collagen, fibronectin, laminin, and entactin; binding of extracellular components to these receptors promotes elon-gation ofaxons and stimulates cytoskeletal protein synthe-sis, and therefore cell movement and axon growth. Some of these extracellular components are found within or near basement membranes surrounding Schwann cells.