The cellular components of the retina include the photo-receptors, a variety of different neurons, and neuroglial cells. Many of these special types of cells can only be detected with the aid of specific staining techniques. These constituents of the retina are stratified into several distinct layers . The rods and cones comprise the outermost part of the sensory retina and are closely apposed to the reti-nal pigment epithelium. The retina's anterior boundary has a serrated edge, at which point it is approxi-mately 0.1 mm thick. Cysts develop in the peripheral ret-ina in virtually everyone over age 20 years. Here, the retina converges into a single layer of nonpigmented epi-thelium which continues anteriorly to where it merges with the nonpigmented epithelium of the ciliary body . Posteriorly, the retina extends to the optic nerve, where it is approximately 0.5 to 0.6 mm thick. The sensory retina is in direct contact with the vitreous and lies interior to the retinal pigment epithelium, which defines the outer-most border of the retina. The retinal pigment epithelium is a monolayer of cells. These epithelial cells contain numerous intracytoplasmic melanosomes; cellular processes envelop part of the over-lying rods and cones as shown by transmission electron microscopy. The phagocytic function of the retinal pigment epithelium assists in the turnover of the photoreceptor ele-ments. Undigested products of phagoliposomes culminate in the progressively increasing number of lipofuscin gran-ules that accumulate within the retinal pigment epithelium, with time. Some photoreceptors are cylindrical in appearance, whereas others are conical-shaped and somewhat longer and thicker. Internal to the photoreceptors retina. An almost invariable finding in the retina of all human eyes after the age of 20 years is peripheral cystoid degeneration. Macroscopi-cally, the peripheral retina immediately behind the ora serrata has a focally vacuolated appearance. (Reproduced from: Klintworth GK, landers MB III. The Eye: Structure and Function. Baltimore, MD: Williams &Wilkins; 1976,with permission.) - - - .-. - - . -;,~ -~ __--- -nonpigmented epithelium of the ciliary body. The retina is loosely attached to the choroid in the region ofthe ora serrata and is artifactually separated from it in this figure. Right. Microscopi-cally, peripheral cystoid degeneration is characterized by the presence of numerous cyst-like spaces within the retina. (Reproduced from: Klintworth GK, Landers MB III.The Eye: Structure and Function. Baltimore, MD: Williams &Wilkins; 1976, with permission.) is the outer plexiform layer, formed from cell processes of the horizontal and bipolar cells and axonal extensions of the rods and cones. The inner nuclear layer embraces the nuclei of several cell types (the bipolar, Muller, horizontal, and amacrine cells). Constituents of the inner plexiform layer include bipolar and amacrine cell axons and den-drites of the ganglion cells. Near the vitreal aspect of the retina is the ganglion cell layer, composed predominantly of ganglion cell bodies. The axons of these large neurons make up the nerve fiber layer; these processes are usually unmyelinated, but as an incidental developmental anom-aly, bundles of some nerve fibers are occasionally myelin-ated. In older individuals, basophilic PAS-positive intracel-lular rounded bodies, indistinguishable from similar structures in the brain, often accumulate in the nerve fiber layer of the retina near the optic disc. By light microscopy, two acellular zones can be distinguished within the retina: the external and internal limiting mem-branes. The so-called "external limiting membrane" is located between the photoreceptors and the outer nuclear layer. The membrane represents firm junctions between Muller cells and adjacent photoreceptors (zonula adher-ens). The basal lamina of the Muller cells accounts for the hyaline structure seen on light microscopy, and is known as the "internal limiting membrane." Similar to the neu-roglial tissue of the brain, by immunohistochemistry, the neuronal cells of the retina show strong immunopositiv-ity to synaptophysin and NeuN (Neuronal Nuclei). Neurofilament protein high-lights the axons of the nerve fiber layer as they continue posteriorly to enter the optic nerve. Glial cells and their processes react with glial fibrillary acidic protein. Light passes through the entire sensory retina before it is converted by the photoreceptor cells into electric impulses.The impulses are eventually transmitted to the visual cortex in the occipital lobe of the brain through a complex series of intercellular connections. The retina varies in structure in different sites . A yellow specialized portion of the retina is located in the posterior pole of the eye (in an area slightly temporal to the optic disc). This is the macula lutea, where the bipolar and ganglion cells contain the pigment xantho-phyll. In the macular region of the retina, the ganglion cells are several layers thick. The center of the macula contains a slightly depressed area measuring almost 1.5 mm in diameter; it is responsible for most visual acuity. The walls of the fovea centralis are known as the clivus, and the precise center is designated the foveola. Blood vessels ganglion cell layer, inner and outer nuclear layers, and inner and outer plexiform layers. is restricted to neurons of the ganglion cell layer and a few cells in the inner nuclear layer. Glial fibrillary acidic protein highlights the retinal glia and their processes. are absent in the foveola, which measures approximately 0.4 mm in diameter. The inner layers of the retina are dis-placed peripherally in the foveola so that only the photo-receptors, the outer nuclear layer, and the outer plexiform layer are present. Cones are located within the foveola, but rods are absent. The microvasculature of the normal retina is composed of branches of the central retinal artery and tributaries of the central retinal vein. It contains arterioles, venules, and H&E x80; right: H&E x160). sin digestion discloses retinal capillaries adjacent to a retinal arteriole jH&E x25). intervening capillaries. In capillaries from normal individuals, endothelial cells and pericytes are pres-ent in a ratio of approximately 1: 1. The retinal microvas-culature is effected in hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and other conditions. Capillary microaneurysms and the loss of capillary pericytes are characteristics of diabetic retinopa-thy. These are best visualized in flat preparations of the retina after trypsin digestion of the retinal cells. Artifacts of the Retina It is necessary to distinguish a true detachment of the sensory retina from the retinal pigment epithelium from an artifacti-tious retinal detachment in the same location. True retinal detachments are characterized by the presence of blood or eosinophilic proteinaceous fluid in the space between the two retinal layers, rounded edges at the site of the retinal break, photoreceptor elements of one fold of retina eosinophilic proteinaceous fluid within the subretinal space jH&E x20). Artifactual retinal detachments are characterized by retinal pigment epithelium granules within the tips of the photorecep-tors and the absence of subretinal eosinophilic fluid jH&E x20). adjacent to the internal limiting membrane of another fold, an absence of photoreceptor outer segments, and the presence of cyst-like spaces within the detached retina. In contrast, artifactitious retinal detachments typically lack subretinal fluid that is rich in eosinophilic protein or blood, have squared-off edges at the site of the break with intact photoreceptor outer segments, and fragments of pigment epithelium cell debris are adherent to the photoreceptor outer segments. At the ora serrata, the sensory retina of neonates and chil-dren folds inwardly upon itself in eyes that have been subjected to a fixative such as formalin. This artifact of fixation is not observed in the living eye or in infant eyes. At the ora serrata the peripheral retina typically takes on a bowed or concave appearance anteriorly. The absence of subretinal fluid distinguishes this from a true retinal detachment jH&E xl0). unfixed enucleated eyes that have been sectioned to observe the peripheral retina. Lange's fold is thought to result from traction on the peripheral retina by a shortening of the vitre-ous base and posterior lens zonules caused by tissue fixation. After the age of 20 years Lange's fold is not observed, presum-ably because the peripheral retina has become firmly bound to the subjacent retinal pigment epithelium. The convexity of this artifact of fixation is directed anteriorly and axially in neonates, but in older infants and children the fold is initiated some distance from the ora serrata, apparently because of a propensity for peripheral retinal adhesions to the subjacent retinal pigment epithelium with increasing age. In contrast to a true retinal detachment, subretinal fluid is not present between the layers of the sensory retina in Lange's folds.