Although there are several different entities referred to in the past under this name, some (idiopathic intestinal lipo-dystrophy, or Whipple's disease) are infectious and others; see section entitled Mes-enteritis) are inflammatory disorders without fundamental changes in the fat cells themselves. The one example of a true lipodystrophy is called "membranous lipodystrophy," a relatively new clinical entity characterized by abnormal fat cells, bone cysts with pathologic fractures, and leukodystro-phy of the brain. The marrow fat is particularly affected, but the "membranocystic" lesions are also present to a lesser degree in the subcutaneous adipose tis-sue. The characteristic and pathognomonic finding is the highly shrivelled, undulating outline of individual fat cell membranes, giving them hyalin eosinophilic convolu-tions or "arabesque profiles." Multiple small cysts are found, apparently formed by fusion of ruptured adipocytes. Young adults are affected in Japan and Finland primarily, but five cases have been seen in the United States. Its etiol-ogy and pathogenesis are unknown; it is probably related to an enzyme deficiency. A secondary form of membra-nous lipodystrophy has been described in association with lupus erythematosus and morphea profunda. Inter-estingly, the membranous changes in fat characteristic of lipodystrophy can also be seen in normal fat affected by radiation therapy. Another secondary disease is HIV treatment-associated lipodystrophy. ADiPOCYTES IN ORGANS Fatty Infiltration As distinct from lipid accumulation or steatosis (see section entitled Steatosis), fatty infiltration is defined as the pres-ence of mature adipose tissue in sites not normally contain-ing fat. This is a disorder or condition relating to adipocyte cell growth and, therefore, the term fatty degeneration is a misnomer and incorrect. In some situations, such as within extremity muscle groups, the process of fatty infiltrationis often related to atrophy of the involved site. This association between fatty infiltration and atrophy or involu-tion is also noted in other organs [thymus, bone mar-row, and kidney] and apparently signifies the propensity for adipocytes to fill a vacuum, in a sense, left by atrophic processes. Whatever the stimulus may be, the adipocytes probably arise from pluripotent mesenchymal cells adjacent to blood vessels. The reversal of this relationship is found in the parathyroid gland, where there is an inverse relationship between parenchymal cells and adipocytes, to the point where no adipocytes are present in complete parathyroid hyperplasia. Nonatrophic organs can also accumulate fat cells (lipo-matosis), and the classic examples are the heart and the pancreas. In these locations, no parenchymal damage is discerned, and the process is a type of accidentallipogen-esis. In the case of the pancreas, normal parenchymal histology and function are present even though the pancreas may be nearly invisible grossly. This type of pan-creatic lipomatosis is correlated with age and obesity and also occurs in diabetics. The amount of pancreatic tissue is thought to be either completely normal or par-tially depleted. However, true pancreatic atrophy with resultant lipomatosis also exists as a rare condition known as Shwachman syndrome [see Table 7.2 in section entitled Syndromes Associated with Fatty Lesions (Includ-ing Lipomatosis)]. Fatty infiltration of the heart is most often an innocuous condition with no effect on the myocar-dial fiber or cardiac function. However, there are rare exceptions in which severe adiposity has resulted in cardiac rupture. Another clinically important lesion is termed lipomatous hypertrophy of the interatrial septum, a focal enlargement that may cause sudden death, arrhyth-mias, or congestive failure. Be mindful that the occasional appearance of fat in endocardial biopsies in no way indicates cardiac perforation. Isolated fat cells can be found within lymph nodes in childhood, but enlarged nodes with prominent fatty infiltra-tion mainly occur in adults, particularly in obesity. Common in the abdomen and retroperitoneum, such "lipo-lymph nodes" can be mistaken for lipomas or be interpreted as positive in a lymphangiogram for lymphoma or Hodgkin's disease, mimicking lymphoma relapse. Rarely, a lipoma or angiomyoli-poma occurs in the liver, but those lesions should not be confused with the hepatic pseudolipoma. This pseudolipoma is often found as a bulge on the surface of the liver and probably represents capture of previously detached appendices epiploicae. In the mouth, fat is one of the components contributing to macroglossia in certain conditions. The Ito cells of the liver are fat-containing cells along the sinuses and are a variation on normal histology; they may become prominent in the condition known as "lipopeliosis" and may be involved in the benign neo-plasm called "spongiotic pericytoma". Syndrome Description Fat necrosis with infarction and lipogranulomatous reaction; found in patients with large pendulous breasts Diffuse mammary steatonecrosis Acute pancreatitis Retractile mesenteritisDisseminated focal areas of fat necrosis in the subcutis; may also occur with pancreatic carcinoma Fibrosis and retraction of mesentary with distortion of intestinal loops; the outcome of mesentary panniculitis/ isolated mesenteric lipodystrophy Weber-Christian diseaseHistoric term for a clinical syndrome with chronic inflammation, fat necrosis, and scattered acute inflammatory cells in the subcutis- "nonsuppurative panniculitis" with recurrent lesions and febrile illness; this is now known to be due to a variety of separate diseases and is a term to be avoided Beradinelli's lipodystrophy A minor part of a complex disorder including gigantism, hyperlipidemia, fatty cirrhosis of liver, muscular hypertrophy, and hyperpigmentation; familial Dercum's disease Multiple lipomas with pain and tenderness Sexual infantilism with obesity and symmetrical or asymmetrical lipomas Frohlich's syndrome Symmetrical lipomatosis; associated with alcohol intake Madelung's disease Familial intestinal polyposis; subcutaneous lipomas may occur Gardner's syndrome Subcutaneous lipomas occur; a case of liposarcoma reported Multiple endocrine adenomotosis I Schwachman syndrome Lipomatous atrophy of the pancreas with prominent lipomatosis, maldigestion, neutropenia, and growth retardation Trite's syndrome Carney's syndromeA combination ofthymolipoma, thyrolipoma, and pharyngeal lipoma Pulmonary hamartomas, gastric smooth muscle tumors, and paraganglioma Beckwith's hemihypertrophyAngiomyolipomas of kidney, other tumors, and hamartomas; occasionally diffuse lipomatosis Tuberous sclerosis Congenital asymmetry, some with associated Wilms' tumor, occasional benign mesenchymoma with adipose tissue Familial multiple lipomas Multiple subcutaneous lipomas Autosomal dominant disorder with macrocephaly, lipomas, hemangiomas, and intracranial tumors Bannayan's syndrome Congenital optic nerve atrophy, polydactyly, mental defect, and occasional adrenal lipomas Laurence-Moon-Biedl syndrome Carpal tunnel syndrome Occasionally caused by tendon sheath lipoma Encephalocraniocutaneous lipomatosis Fishman's syndrome Oculoauriculo-vertebral dysplasia with CNS lipomas Goldenhar-Gorlin syndrome GI polyposis with orocutaneous hamartomas; angiolipomas have been observed Cowden's disease Fatty infiltration of epidural space; occasionally secondary to steroids Spinal epidural lipomatosis Membranous lipodystrophyAbnormal subcutaneous and bony fat with bone cysts, pathologic fractures, and leukodystrophy of brain