Whereas the embryonic development of the fetal skin has been divided into eight stages, using scanning electron microscopy, the embryonic development of the nail shows only five stages: plate phase, fibril-lar phase, granular phase, squamous phase, and definitive nail phase or end phase. Nail Unit 8 Embryonic/Fetal Skin b Development Indifferent epithelium 7-10 weeks phase Flattened surface phase Elevated surface phase Incipient bleb formation 2.5-3 months phase Single bleb formation 3-4 months phase Complex bleb formation 4-5 months phase Cornification phase Up to 5 monthsPlaque phase Fibrillar phase Granular phase Squamous phase Definitive nail phase "Suchard R. Des modifications des cellules de la matrice et du lit de I'ongle dans quelques cas pathologiques. Arch Physiol 1882;2:445. bHolbrook KA, Odland GF.The fine structure of the developing human epidermis: light, scanning, and transmission electron microscopy of the periderm. JInvest Dermatol 1975;65:16-38.The earliest recognizable fingers are seen in 42- to 45-day-old embryos, while the toes lag somewhat and are seen at 52 to 54 days of age. Studies using optical microscopy showed that the ungual morphogenesis begins at the embryonic age of 10 weeks, with a smooth, shiny quadrangular surface delin-eated by continuous shallow grooves. This surface of the phalanx is the "primary nail base" of Zander or "primary nail field" of Zaias, delimited proximally by a transversal groove: The proximal nail groove. Studies we performed using scanning electron micros-copy showed that the formation of the nail begins very early, at the embryonic age of 7 weeks, with an accumulation of strongly active cells, abundant mitosis, and cellular damage, followed by necrosis, with the presence of T lymphocytes in the primary nail base. This phenomenon, named apoptosis, occurs in all the epidermal accumulated cells following a transversal band in the dorsal area of the distal third of the fingers. Apoptosis of these epidermal cells is the most important step in the nail's development because it permits an immediate epidermal invagination identical to the one in the hair follicle except for one differ-ence; in the hair follicle, the process starts at the age of 2.5 to 3 months. We observed apoptosis in nail development in this first phase only. Yet, the two processes are so identical that, sometimes, the layers of the nail have been compared with those of the hair follicle. The result is the formation of a transversal groove, which subsequently becomes the proximal nail fold. An interesting feature of the first stages is the exces-sive size of the primitive nail plate, nearly occupying the total distal third part of the finger. This plate stays attached to its surroundings through some periungual-fixing filaments. At the age of 11 weeks, all the folds are already formed, both the proximal and lateral nail folds. The transversal distal fold, corresponding to the hyponychium, is completely keratin-ized at the age of 3.5 months. Afterward, the epidermal cells of the nail field suffer a process of kera-tin formation, different from the rest of the embryo. The result is a keratinized structure, covering the whole nail bed from the age of 14 weeks on, sometimes confused by some authors with a false nail The production of the true nail plate starts from the matrix cells, located in the proximal nail groove and the most proximal portion of the nail bed. Its presence in the proximal fold is visible from the fifth month of intrauterine life on, the histochemi-cal confirmation of its formation being the presence of sulf-hydryl radicals. The nail unit at this stage shows grooves form by invagi-nations of primitive ectoderm in regions that will become nail folds. These grooves delimit rectangular areas at dis-tal aspects of dorsa of fingers and toes where nail plates will be situated subsequently. These areas are covered by primitive epithelium, that approximately at the fourteenth week of intrauterine life appears composed of a basal layer of primitive germinative cells, three or four lay-ers of primitive keratinocytes with clear or pale cytoplasm, and a thin and eosinophilic acellular layer at the surface. This primitive epithelium covering the dorsum of a distal phalanx develops two clusters of epithelial cells at their proximal and distal ends. The proximal bud of primitive epithelial basaloid cells proliferates backward and down-ward, descending at an angle into the subjacent primitive mesenchymal tissue. The superficial part of this wedge of epithelial cells will become the proximal nail fold and the deeper part will eventuate in the dorsal and intermediate nail matrices. At the junction between the superficial and deeper parts, there is a crease of cornified cells that will Development of the human nail exhibited through scanning electron microscopy. Plaque phase: Foot of 7-week-old human embryo. The fingers are already defined but have no inter-phalangeal folds. On the third toe, you can see distally poorly struc-tured material accumulated (arrow in A,x50) that corresponds to apoptotic cells, which limits the future proximal nail fold. Close-up view of the apoptotic cells: Amorphous extra-cellular material appears with numerous vesicles of keratohyalin which are differ-ent phases oftheir evolution. be the cuticle of the fully developed nail. At this stage of development, the primitive mesenchymal tissue underly-ing the future nail is a highly cellular tissue with abundant ground substance. At this time, the future distal phalanx is represented by primitive cartilaginous tissue with the earli-est evidences of focal calcification. Distally, the primitive epithelium forms another cluster of cells with a distal ridge that will become the hyponychium. From the fifth month on, the definitive nail plate starts to grow in a distal sense until it reaches the hyponychium at the time of birth. The growth mechanism of the defini-tive nail is discussed later in the section entitled "Nail Growth." gers of the hand of a 3-month-old embryo. The ungual region is per-fectly delimited by the proximal nail fold. The ungual region is delimited by multiple fibrillar forma-tions. Different morphol-ogy is seen in the nail bed surface. Detail of the fibrillar attachment of the nail region to the neighboring tissue. GENETIC AND NAIL KERATINShyperkeratosis of the nail, but fragility of the underlying nail bed keratinocytes presumably leads to release of cytokines and other inflammatory factors that act upon the prolifera-tive cells of the nail matrix and produce overgrowth of the nail. Shotgun proteomic analysis of the human nail plate identified 144 proteins in the samples from Caucasian vol-unteers, with identifying more than 300 constituents of the isopeptide cross-linked proteome and even certain post-translational modifications. The 30 identified proteins solu-bilized by detergent and reducing agents, 90% of the total nailEpithelial cells possess three cytoskeletal systems: Actin microfilaments, microtubules, and keratin intermediate filaments. The protective structural role of keratins was clearly revealed in the early 1990s, when mutations in human keratin genes were discovered in a variety of human genetic diseases characterized by fragility and/or overgrowth of specific epithelial tissues. It is not precisely known how mutations in these keratins lead to the hand of 4.5-month-old embryo. All fin-gers show a granular aspect. The nail bed has an undulating surface cov-ered by keratin scales. The hypo-nychium zone is occupied by numerous keratohyalin vesicles tc,x400; 0,x150). plate mass, were primarily keratins and keratin-associated proteins. Keratins comprise a majority of the detergent-insoluble fraction as well, but numerous cytoplasmic mem-brane, and junctional proteins and histones were also identi-fied, indicating broad use by transglutaminases of available proteins as substrates for cross-linking. Keratins are a large family of intermediate filament pro-teins encoded by more than 50 distinct genes in humans. About half of these are the epithelial keratins that are found in soft epithelial tissues of the human body. The rest are the trichocyte or high sulfur hard keratins of which hair and nail are composed. Both epithelial keratins and hard keratins can be further subdivided into type I andtype II proteins, on the basis of their size, charge, and amino acid sequence characteristics. Recent work has shown that the human hair keratin family consists of nine type I and six type II members, whose genes are organized as distinct clusters within the type I and type II epithelial keratin gene domains on chromosomes 17q21.2 and 12q 13.3, respectively. The functional type I and type II keratin genes are each clustered on distinct chromosomes in the human and mouse genomes. The pairwise and differentiation-related regulation of most type I and type II keratin genes provides a unique handle to track differentiation within epithelial tissue. A fam-ily-wide, crucial function of keratin filaments is to endow complete in the nail bed surface, simulating a false nail. The cuticle and hyponychium are also completely developed. area. epithelial cells with the ability to withstand mechanical and other forms of stress. The pattern of the keratins in the nail unit differs from that of the follicle in two points: The lack of an IRS-like compartment and of the companion layer. The expres-sion of K6hf was observed almost exclusively in the nail bed. K6 and K16 were expressed in the eponychium, the apical matrix, and the nail bed, but not in the ventral matrix. Dis-tribution of K6 and K16 was essentially suprabasal. On the basis of morphologic and biochemical considerations, the distal nail unit can be divided into three segments. The nail bed, which represents the main segment of distal nail unit, does not differentiate into a thin, orthokeratinizing surface. The nail isthmus is typified by a peculiar mode of keratini-zation, which is closely adherent to the inferior border of the nail plate, including its distal free edge. The nail isthmus pres-ents a profile of keratin expression in transition between the nail bed and the hyponichium. The keratin pattern of the nail bed, including K6hf and Ki-67, is maintained. How-ever, the nail isthmus differs from the nail bed in that Kl 0 is only present in nail isthmus. The morphologic aspect and the pattern of expression of K5, K17, K6, K16, and K75 suggested a differentiation toward the nail bed and the nail isthmus. Accordingly, mutations in keratin genes are respon-sible for a number of genetically based fragility disorders involving specific cell types in skin and other epithelia. Among type I keratin genes, K17 stands out in multiple ways. In mouse embryonic skin, it is first expressed in ectodermal cells committing to a nonepidermal cell fate in response to mesen-chymal induction. Concomitant with skin maturation, mK17 expression becomes restricted to specific cell lay-ers and compartments within all major types of epithelial appendages. Both hK17 and mK17 can be coregulated with distinct type II keratin genes in mature epithelial settings. In addition to its constitu-tive expression in epithelial appendages, K17 expression is induced in mature interfollicular epidermis subjected to various types of acute challenges (eg, injury, UVexposure, inflammation) or during diseases (eg, psoriasis, basal cell carcinoma). Mutations affecting a particular segment ofhK17's coding sequence can cause distinct disorders of the skin, related to ectodermal dysplasias.