Our scientific knowledge of apoptosis in skeletal muscle is still at a rudimentary stage, but the medical literature is beginning to address apoptosis as a regulatory process in the normal development of muscle and in its relationship to selected pathologic conditions including aging. Dur-ing embryologic life, both neurons and skeletal muscle are affected by the process of apoptosis. A great deal more is known about programmed cell death in nerve cells, includ-ing motor neurons, than in muscle. Embryonic develop-ment of motor neurons and muscles culminates in the establishment of mature nerve-muscle relationships. Dur-ing embryogenesis, a necessary remodeling of muscles occurs through apoptosis, which removes "unwanted" cells or structures to make room for further maturation. In the embryo, programmed cell death clearly occurs as the myo-fibers are developing. The large diameter primary myotubes are preferentially affected. The cytologic features suggesting apoptosis include misshapen nuclei and irregular chroma-tin condensations along the nuclear envelope. It has been shown that, in rat embryos, macrophages play an important role in the removal of dead fibers. In human fetal muscle, the programmed cell death of both primary and mature myotubes occurs between 10 and 16 weeks of gestation. A recently described pathway to apoptosis involves the TRAIL death ligand-signaling pathway. TRAIL binds to its upregulated receptor, DR5, initiating the caspase 8 route to apoptosis. At the same time, FLIP, a caspase 8 inhibitor, is known to be reduced. A second pathway involves mito-chondrial permeability brought about by the proapoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family. This route is mediated by caspase 9. The Bcl-2/caspase 9 pathway is also important in the sarcopenia of aging during which there is a loss of myocytes. A more complete body of information regarding apop-totic events in postnatal and adult muscle is beginning to accumulate. Such diverse conditions as disuse, exercise, ischemia, aging, and certain myopathies are being exam-ined. Skeletal muscle apoptosis differs from most other tissues in several ways. Muscle cells are multinucleated, and their mitochondrial composition varies with fiber type and other factors such as exercise. Muscle cells contain two separate mitochondrial populations, subsarcolemmal and intermyofibrillar. It is unclear at the moment whether the expression of pro- and antiapoptotic agents differs in thetwo populations. Because it is a multinucleated cell, the muscle fiber does not always undergo apoptosis in the same fashion as other cell types. Damage limited to individual myonuclei seems to be more common than death of the entire cell. In denervation, myonuclear loss leads to fiber atrophy instead of cell death. Finally, the elevated expres-sion of endogenous caspase inhibitors in muscle seems to confer relatively greater resistance to apoptosis in muscle tissue.