Otitis Media Otitis media is either an acute or a chronic infectious dis-ease of the middle ear space. Otitis media is predominantly, but not exclusively, a childhood disease. The most common microorganisms implicated in causing disease of the middle ear are Streptococcus pneumoniae and Hemophilus infiu-enzae. Otoscopic examination reveals a hyperemic, opaque, bulging tympanic membrane with limited mobility; purulent otorrhea may be present. Bilateral involvement is not uncommon. The middle ear infection is felt to result from infection via the Eustachian tube at the time of or fol-lowing a pharyngitis. In general, otitis media is managed medically. However, at times tissue is removed for histopathologic examination. The pathologic alterations are generally straightforward but secondary changes such as glandular metaplasia of the surface epithelium, the result of chronic infection, mayoccur that might be confused with a true gland forming neoplasm. The histologic changes in chronic otitis media include a variable amount of chronic inflammatory cells consisting of lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells, and eosinophils. Mul-tinucleated giant cells and foamy histiocytes may be pres-ent. The middle ear low cuboidal epithelium mayor may not be seen. However, glandular metaplasia, a response of the middle ear epithelium to the infectious process, may be pres-ent. The glands tend to be more common in nonsuppurative otitis media than in suppurative otitis media. The metaplastic glands are unevenly distributed in the tissue specimens, are variably shaped and are separated by abun-dant stromal tissue. The glands are lined by a columnar to cuboidal epithelium with or without cilia or goblet cell meta-plasia. Glandular secretions mayor may not be present so that the glands may appear empty or contain varying secre-tions, including thin or thick fluid content. The identification of cilia is confirmatory of middle ear glan-dular metaplasia and is a feature that is not found in associa-tion with middle ear adenomas. Further, the haphazard arrangement of the glands in the background of changes of chronic otitis media should allow for differentiating meta-plastic glands from neoplastic glands. Acute inflammatory cells may be superimposed by those of chronic otitis media. In addition to the inflammatory cell infiltrate and glan-dular metaplasia, other histopathologic findings can be seen in association with chronic otitis media (or represent sequelae of chronic otitis media) and include fibrosis, gran-ulation tissue, tympanosclerosis, cholesterol granulomas, and reactive bone formation. Due to the presence of scar tissue, the middle ear ossicles may be destroyed (partial or total) or may become immobilized. Perforation of the tympanic membrane pars tensa may occur with resulting ingrowth of squamous epithelium potentially leading to the development of cholesteatoma. Tympanosclerosis represents dystrophic mineralization of the tympanic membrane or middle ear that is associated with recurrent episodes of otitis media. The incidence of tympanosclerosis in otitis media varies from 3 to 33%. Tympanosclerosis of the tympanic membrane can be seen in children following myringotomy and tube insertion. In this setting, the tympa-nosclerotic foci mayor may not be permanent. Tympano-sclerosis of the middle ear typically affects older patients, represents irreversible accumulation of mineralized mate-rial and is associated with conductive hearing loss. On gross examination, tympanosclerotic foci may be localized or diffuse and appear as white nodules or plaques. Histologically, dense "clumps" of miner-alized calcified or ossified material or debris can be seen within the stromal tissues or in the middle (connective tissue) aspect of the tympanic membrane. Tympanosclerosis may cause scarring and ossicular fixation. Cholesterol granuloma is a histologic designation describ-ing the presence a foreign body granulomatous response to metaplasia can be found in the setting of otitis media. A.Otitis media showing chronic inflammation, fibrosis, glandular metaplasia, and foci of calcifications; residual normal cuboidal epithelium ofthe middle ear is seen in the upper left; B.higher magnification showing glandular metaplasia is the setting of chronic otitis media. cholesterol crystals derived from the rupture of red blood cells with breakdown of the lipid layer of the erythrocyte cell membrane. Cholesterol granulomas arise in the middle ear and mastoid in any condition in which there is hemor-rhage combined with interference in drainage and ventila-tion of the middle ear space. Cholesterol granuloma of the middle ear may present as idiopathic hemotympanum; patients may also complain of hearing loss and tinnitus. Most of the cholesterol granulomas in the middle ear and temporal bone have an indolent biologic behavior and cause no significant bone resorption. In contrast to cholesterol granulomas of the middle ear and temporal bone, cholesterol granulomas of the petrous cified plaque on the tympanic membrane.apex may behave aggressively producing a tumor-like mass with expansion of the cyst and erosion/destruction of adjacent structures. Depending on the direction of expan-sion, apical cholesterol granulomas may invade into the cochlea, cerebellopontine angle, jugular foramen, cranial nerves V-XI, brain stem, and cerebellum producing life-threatening symptoms. Involvement of the petrous apex is more likely to be associated with sensorineural hearing loss; additional signs and symptoms may include headaches, cranial nerve deficits, and bone erosion with involvement of the posterior or middle cranial fossa has been reported. On axial computed tomography, apical cholesterol granulomas appear as round to ovoid ened and calcified and covered on its external aspect by keratinizing squamous epithelium and internal (tym-panic cavity) aspect by cuboidal epithelium. to irregular-appearing cysts with smooth margins and evi-dence of bone remodeling. The histology of cholesterol granulomas is the same irre-spective of location and includes the presence of irregular-shaped clear-appearing spaces surrounded by histiocytes and/or multinucleated giant cells. Cholesterol granulomas are not related to cholesteatomas but may occur in association with or inde-pendent of a cholesteatoma. Cholesteatoma Cholesteatoma is a pseudo neoplastic lesion of the middle ear characterized by the presence of stratified squamous epi-thelium that forms a sac-like accumulation of keratin within the middle ear space. Despite their invasive growth, cholesteatomas are not con-sidered to be true neoplasms. The term cholesteatoma is a misnomer in that it is not a neoplasm nor does it contain cho-lesterol. Perhaps the designation of keratoma would be more accurate but the term cholesteatoma is entrenched in the lit-erature. In the middle ear and the inner ear, cholesteatomas take three forms: acquired cholesteatoma, congenital choles-teatoma, and cholesteatoma of the petrous apex. Depending on the site of origin in the tympanic membrane, each of these cholesteatomas may be subdivided into pars flaccida (Shrap-nell's membrane) and pars tensa cholesteatomas. Acquired Cholesteatoma Acquired cholesteatoma is the most common type of cho-lesteatoma. It tends to be more common in men than in women and occur in older children and young adults. Acquired cholesteatoma is derived from entry of external ear canal epidermis into the middle ear. The latter may arise in one of several ways: via perforation of the tympanic appears as empty, irregularly shaped clefts or spaces surrounded by histiocytes and multinucleated giant cells. Fresh hemor-rhage and hemosiderin pigment are readily apparent.membrane, following localized retraction of the tympanic membrane with epithelial invagination or ingrowth of a band of stratified squamous epithelium into the middle ear, via entrapment of squamous epithelium following surgery and/or trauma or via squamous metaplasia of the middle ear mucosa. A decrease in middle ear pressure can induce retraction of certain regions of the tympanic membrane in the pars flaccida, pars tensa, or both. Retraction pock-ets are felt to represent the precursors for the development of cholesteatoma. Dysfunction of the Eustachian tube leading to chronic otitis media is felt to represent a causative factor. The triggers for cholesteatoma onset are diverse, and may involve tympanic membrane trauma (ie, perforation, displacement, retrac-tion, or invagination), tympanic membrane disease, and/or tympanic cavity mucosa disease. Research has revealed that cell migration is replaced under inflammatory conditions by hyperplasia, which is felt to be the trigger for the onset of cholesteatoma. Diseased mucosa can contribute to the development of retraction pockets and cholesteatoma. The upper posterior part of the middle ear space is the most common site of acquired cholesteatomas. Initially, cholesteatomas may remain clinically silent until extensive invasion of the middle ear space and mastoid occurs. Symp-toms include hearing loss, malodorous discharge, and pain and may be associated with a polyp arising in the attic of the middle ear or perforation of the tympanic membrane. Oto-scopic examination may reveal the presence of white debris within the middle ear, which is considered diagnostic. Congenital Cholesteatoma Congenital cholesteatoma is a cholesteatoma of the middle ear that exists in the presence of an intact tympanic mem-brane presumably occurring in the absence of chronic otitis pocket of the tympanic membrane at autopsy. There is a thin layer of stratified squamous epithelium between the bone and middle ear epithelium. This was found on serial section to be an ingrowth of the stratified squamous epithelium from the outer epithelial covering of the retraction pocket. media that may result in perforation or retraction of the tympanic membrane. Congenital cholesteatomas are found in infants and young children. Small colonies of epidermoid cells referred to as epidermoid formations are found on the lateral anterior superior surface of the middle ear in tem-poral bones after 15 weeks gestation. During the first postpartum year, the epidermoid colonies disappear; how-ever, if the epidermoid cells do not disappear but continue to grow, they will become a congenital cholesteatoma. The latter have also been referred to as epidermoid cysts. In most of the cases, congenital cholesteatomas are found in the anterosuperior part of the middle ear. In early lesions,there are no symptoms and are discovered by otoscopic examination. In later lesions, the signs and symptoms may be the same as acquired cholesteatoma. Congenital cholesteatoma is believed to have a different pathophysiology than acquired cholesteatoma in that these patients rarely have Eustachian tube dysfunction. The absence of Eustachian tube dysfunction likely accounts for their reasonable preoperative hearing and their lack of com-plications or recurrences postoperatively. The most important factor is early detection. Treatment remains sur-gical removal. Dornelles et al. attempted to evaluate the quantifica-tion of angiogenesis and matrix metalloproteinases as markers of aggressiveness in cholesteatoma. These authors compared expression of CD31, MMP2, and MMP9 in pediatric and adult patients. The authors found that pediat-ric cholesteatomas presented a more exacerbated inflamma-tory degree and produced more MMP representing factors, that when combined, could characterize pediatric cholestea-tomas as more aggressive than adult cholesteatomas. Cholesteatoma of the Petrous Apex Cholesteatoma of the petrous apex is an epidermoid cyst of this location and bears no relation to cholesteatoma of the middle ear. It is likely of congenital origin but no cell rests have been discovered that may explain the origin of these lesions. Symptoms usually relate to involvement of the VII and VIII cranial nerves in the cerebellopontine angle. Pathology Cholesteatomas irrespective of whether acquired or con-genital appear as cystic, white to pearly appearing mass of varying size containing creamy or waxy granular material. The histologic diagnosis of cholesteatoma is made in the presence of a stratified keratinizing squamous epithelium, subepithelial fibroconnective or granulation tissue, and ker-atin debris. The essential diagnostic feature presence of finding keratinizing squamous epithelium within the middle ear space; B.osseous involvement. is the keratinizing squamous epithelium and the presence of keratin debris alone is not diagnostic of a cholesteatoma. The keratinizing squamous epithelium is cytologically bland and shows cellular maturation without evidence of dysplasia. In spite of its benign histology, cholesteatomas are "invasive" and have widespread destructive capabilities. The destructive properties of cholesteatomas result from a combination of interrelated reasons, including mass effect with pressure erosion of surrounding structures from the cholesteatoma, the production of collagenase, which has osteodestructive capabilities by its resorption of bony struc-tures and bone resorption. Collagenase is produced by both the squamous epithelial and the fibrous tissue components of the cholesteatoma. This local aggressive behavior is the result of the continuing accumulation of the cholesteatoma-tous material with progressive erosion of surrounding struc-tures. Depending on the location and extent of the choles-teatoma, erosion may include the lateral wall of the attic, the middle ear ossicles, the tegmental bone over the attic and antrum, and the mastoid cortex. Less frequent progression includes erosion of the lateral sinus and jugu-lar bulb, the vestibular and cochlear capsules, the fallopian canal, the dura of the middle and posterior cranial fossa, the semicircular canals, and the facial nerve. Sequela of such erosions may include semicircular canal fistulas, exposed tympanic facial nerve, or brain herniation through the tegmen. The histologic diagnosis of cholesteatomas is relatively straightforward in the presence of keratinizing squamous epithelium. Cholesterol granuloma is not syn-onymous with cholesteatoma. These entities are distinctly different pathologic entities and should not be confused with one another. Park et al. evaluated differential expression of p63 and survivin in human middle ear cholesteatoma epithe-lium. p63 is a p53 homologue and a marker expressed in replicating keratinocytes; survivin is an inhibitor of apop-tosis protein that is abundantly expressed in most solid and hematologic malignancies. Expression of p63 protein was diffusely observed in entire samples of cholesteatoma, especially in acquired cholesteatoma, compared with the control group. Congenital cholesteatoma showed vari-able p63 reactivity in a basal cell-like pattern. Primary and recurrent cholesteatomas showed no significant dif-ference in p63 expression. Survivin was detected in 31 of the 40 cholesteatoma samples. Acquired cholesteatomas showed especially increased survivin expression compared with congenital cases. These findings indicate a putative role of p63 and survivin in the development of acquired cholesteatomas. In contrast to cholesteatomas, squamous cell carci-noma shows dysplastic or overtly malignant cytologic fea-tures with a prominent desmoplastic stromal response to its infiltrative growth. Cholesteatomas do not transform into squamous cell carcinomas. In an attempt to determine whether cholesteatomas were low-grade squamous carci-nomas, Desloge et al. performed DNA analysis onhuman cholesteatomas to determine whether ploidy abnor-malities were present. In ten cases with interpretable data, nine were euploid and one was aneuploid. These authors concluded that due to a lack of overt genetic instability, cholesteatomas could not be considered to be malignant neoplasms. Otosclerosis Otosclerosis is a disorder of the bony labyrinth and sta-pedial footplate that exclusively occurs in humans. Oto-sclerosis means hardening of the ear and is derived from Greek; osseous ankylosis; chronic metaplas-tic osteitis; progressive otospongiosis. Otosclerosis pri-marily causes conductive hearing loss that usually begins in the second and third decades of life and is slowly progressive. The extent of the hearing loss directly cor-relates with the degree of stapedial footplate fixation. It is not uncommon for patients with otosclerosis to also have vestibular disturbances. Otosclerosis usu-ally involves both ears; however, unilateral disease can occur up to 15% of cases. Surgical management of the conductive hearing loss caused by stapes fixation (sta-pedectomy) is the treatment of choice with replacement of the fixed stapes by prosthesis. The resected bone may include the entire stapes including the footplate or only the superstructure that includes the head and crura with-out the footplate. Although many theories regarding the etiology of oto-sclerosis appear in the literature, the etiology of otosclerosis is unclear. Hereditary factors are often cited among the causes of otosclerosis with half of all cases occurring in families with more than one affected member. Schrauwen et al. used a genome-wide analysis to identify genetic factors involved in otosclerosis. These authors were able to identify two highly associated single-nucleotide polymor-phisms that replicated in two additional indepen-dent populations. They then genotyped 79 tag SNPs to fine map the two genomic regions defined by the associated SNPs. The region with the stron-gest association signal, was on chromosome 7q22.1 span-ning intron 1 to intron 4 of reelin, a gene known for its role in neuronal migration. Expression of RELN was con-firmed in the inner ear and in stapes footplate specimens. The authors provided evidence that implicates RELN in the pathogenesis of otosclerosis. Subsequently, the authors completed a replication study that includes four additional populations from Europe. Several SNPs in this region replicated in these populations sepa-rately. While the power to detect significant association in each population is small, when all the four populations are combined, six of the seven SNPs replicated and showed an effect in the same direction as in the previous populations. The authors also confirmed the presence of allelic heteroge-neity in this region. These data further implicate RELN in the pathogenesis of otosclerosis. window) involving the footplate of the stapes moving across the annu-lus fibrosus or stapediovestibular joint. Stapedial involvement causes fixation of the stapes with inability to transmit sound waves resulting in conductive hearing loss. Environmental factors are potentially linked to the development of otosclerosis. Environmental factors include fluoride and viral factors, particularly measles. There is compelling evidence that measles virus may playa role in some cases as measles virus RNA has been detected in stapes footplate samples and molecular detection of measles virus has been reported in primary cell cultures of otosclerotic tissue. Michaels and Soucek reported on the origin and growth of otosclerosis. These authors found that the Perforation of drum Erosion of incus Fixation of stapes Fluid in middle ear Eustachian tube closuremain plaque of otosclerosis is a histologic replica of the external layer of the otic capsule and seems to arise from similar cells in the periosteum and to follow a defined invasive course into the footplate of the stapes, the basal coil of the cochlea and the saccule. This process most often begins from the adjacent temporal bone (anterior to the oval window) eventually involving the footplate of the stapes moving across the annulus fibrosus or the stape-diovestibular joint. Stapedial involvement causes fixation of the stapes with inability to transmit sound waves resulting in conductive hearing loss. While the otosclerotic changes can be seen in the resected stapedial footplate, even when the footplate is removed intact, it may be free of otosclerotic changes as fixation results via pressure on the nonotosclerotic footplate from swelling of the otosclerotic process in the adjacent tem-poral bone.