The eye accommodates two major fluid-containing intra-ocular compartments. One is filled with aqueous humor, the other with vitreous humor. The aqueous compartment is divided into an anterior and a posterior chamber (Fig-ure 13.45). The anterior chamber is delineated in front by the cornea, peripherally by the drainage angle of the eye, and posteriorly by the pupil and the iris. The small poste-rior chamber is situated between the pigmented epithelia of the iris, the ciliary body, the anterior face of the vitreous, and the lens. The aqueous humor, a watery solution, which does not normally stain with routine histologic techniques, is produced by the ciliary body and flows forward through the aperture of the pupil to the anterior chamber, where it leaves the eye through the trabecular meshwork and Sch-lernm's canal. The anterior chamber contains approximately 0.25 mL of aqueous humor; the posterior chamber has a anterior surface of the iris, and the pupil. The boundaries of the much smaller posterior chamber include the posterior surface of the iris, the ciliary body, and the anterior face of the vitreous. Aqueous is produced by the ciliary body and circulates from the posterior chamber through the pupil into the anterior chamber. Aqueous drains from the eye by way of the trabecular meshwork and Schlernrn's canal. (Reproduced from: Klintworth GK, Landers MB III. The Eye. Structure and Function. Baltimore, MD: Williams &Wilkins; 1976, with permission.) in standard tissue sections. volume of only approximately 0.06 mL. Normal human aqueous humor has a density slightly greater than water, and like plasma, it contains protein, ascorbic acid, electro-lytes, and glucose. The major differences between aqueous humor and plasma are the relatively low-protein and high-ascorbic acid concentration of aqueous, relative to plasma. The vitreous extends from the sensory retina to the lens and contains a gel-like material composed of water, protein, hyaluronic acid, and a small population of cells, designated hyalocytes, which are rarely noted in standard tissue sec-tions. These tissue macrophages are thought to synthesize collagen and hyaluronic acid. The gelatinous consistency of the vitreous is due to a framework of numerous, randomly oriented collagen fibrils. The concentration of glucose and ascorbic acid is much lower than in the aqueous, whereas the concentration of soluble protein is similar to that of the aqueous. The vitreous is attached securely to the retina at the ora serrata and near the optic disc. Occasionally, vit-reous may be identified as an amorphous acellular material on H&E stained sections.