Embryology The first division of the ear to develop is the inner ear, which appears toward the end of the first month of gestation. The membranous labyrinth, including the utricle, saccule, three semicircular ducts, cochlear duct, and endolymphatic sac arises from the placodal thickening of the ectoderm to become a closed otic vesicle. The otic vesicle forms from the invagination of the surface ectoderm, located on mature adipose tissue component.either side of the neural plate, into the mesenchyme (Fig-ure 14.2). This invagination eventually loses its connection with the surface ectoderm. The membranous labyrinth, which is essentially tubular and saccular in turn, is filled with fluid, the endolymph or endolymphatic fluid. The early development of the membranous labyrinth takes place in mesenchyme and subsequently in the cartilage destined to form the petrous portion of the temporal bone. The membranous labyrinth lies in cavities excavated from this mesenchyme or cartilage. The space lying between the inner surface of the bony wall and the outer surface of the mem-branous labyrinth is the perilymphatic space. The perilym-phatic space develops around the membranous labyrinth by fusion of mesenchymal spaces to form larger ones surround-ing the membranous portion. The bony labyrinth, including the vestibule, semicircular canals, and cochlea arises from the mesenchyme around the otic vesicle. ANATOMY The internal ear, or labyrinth, is embedded within the petrous portion of the temporal bone and comprises the medial portion of the temporal bone adjacent to the cranial cavity. The inner ear contains the membranous labyrinth, which is surrounded by an osseous layer or bony shell termed the osseous labyrinth. The membra-nous labyrinth contains the cochlea, which is the organ of hearing and the vestibular system, which is the system of balance. Osseous Labyrinth The osseous labyrinth consists of the vestibular and the cochlear capsule. The central portion of the osseous lab-yrinth cavity is the vestibule, a large ovoid perilymphatic space approximately 4 mm in diameter containing both the saccule and the utricle of the membranous labyrinth. In the floor of the bony vestibule the elliptical recess for the ante-rior end of the utricle is seen and anterior and lateral to this the spherical recess for the saccule is seen. In the lateral wall of the vestibule is the oval window in which the base of the stapes is situated. Through the stapes, the perilymph of the vestibule receives vibrations from the tympanic mem-brane and the ossicular chain set up by sound waves reach-ing the tympanic cavity. Along the medial wall and floor of the vestibule, where it abuts the lateral end of the internal acoustic meatus, are small openings for the entrance of the nerve branches to the vestibular portion of the ear. The bony cochlea, a part of the otic capsule, is a hol-lowed spiral about two- to three-fourths turns diminishing from a relatively broad base to a pointed cupula or apex. It is named so due to its resemblance to a snail shell. The base of the cochlea lies against the anteromedial surface of the vestibule and next to the anterior surface of the lateral end of the internal auditory canal. A central core of the osseous labyrinth. Common crus Posterior semicircular canal semicircular canal bone called the modiolus runs forward from the cochlea but does not reach the cupula. It is around this central core that the spiral channels of the cochlea (perilymphatic and endo-lymphatic) are arranged. A layer of bone arranged in a spiral fashion unites the modiolus to the peripheral wall of the bony cochlea and separates successive spiral cavities from each other. The modiolus is hollow to accommodate the cochlear nerve. The base of the modiolus lies against the lateral end of the internal auditory canal to where the cochlear nerve runs. The vestibular aqueduct extends through the otic cap-sule from the vestibule to the posterior cranial fossa trans-mitting the endolymphatic duct. The terminal end of the vestibular aqueduct is the endolymphatic sac, a dilated area that ends blindly outside the dura. The cochlear duct opens at one end into the lower end of the scala tympani and at the other end into the subarachnoid cavity. The issue as to whether the cochlear duct represents an open channel between the subarachnoid space and the perilym-phatic space at the lower end of the scala tympani remains controversial. A possible role ascribed to the cochlear duct is to serve as part of the pressure-adjusting mecha-nism of the perilymph in conjunction with the round win-dow. Membranous Labyrinth The membranous labyrinth is the spiral-appearing structure that resembles the shell of a snail. The principle components of the membranous labyrinth are the cochlearSuperior semicircular canal Elliptical recess recess the cochlea Oval window duct, the utricle, the saccule, the ductus reuniens, the semicircular canals with their ampullae, and the endolym-phatic sac and duct. Cochlear Duct The membranous cochlea or cochlear duct is a cone-shaped spirally oriented membranous tube between the osseous spiral lamina and the outer osseous wall of the cochlea to which it is attached. The cochlear duct also referred to as the scala media lies between the scala vestib-uli and the scala tympani. These three com-partments are fluid filled. The cochlear duct, as well as the entire membranous labyrinth contains endolymph. The scala vestibuli and the scala tympani contain perilymph. The cerebrospinal fluid communicates directly with the perilymphatic space through the cochlear aque-duct. The cochlear duct contains the sensory organ of hearing known as the spiral organ of Corti. The organ of Corti rests on the basilar membrane, which separates the cochlear duct from the scala tympani. Together, the organ of Corti and the basilar membrane form the spiral mem-brane, which is the floor or tympanic wall of the cochlear duct. The spiral ligament is a thickened modified por-tion of periosteum of the bony cochlea forming the outer curved wall of the cochlea duct and adjacent parts of the scalae. The scala tympani lies below the basilar mem-brane while the scala vestibuli lies above the cochlear duct and is separated from it by Reissner's membrane. Spiral ligament ' Stria vascularisScala vestibuli [Na+] >[K+] .' : .'Scala media [K+] >[Na+].' Spiral prominence OuterLimb~ interden~ I Bone· Spiral ligamentBasilar membraneUnmyelinated nerve fibers IScala tympani [Na+] >[K+]Myelinated cochlear nerve fibers CO. Bone of hearing) and the vestibular systems, showing the relationship between the endolymph containing scala media and the perilymph containing scala vestibuli and scala tympani. (From Nager GT.Anatomy ofthe membranous cochlea and vestibular labyrinth. In: Nager GT,ed. Pathology of the Ear and Temporal Bone. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins; 1993:3-48, with permission.) Reissner's membrane forms the roof of the cochlear duct. The scala tympani and scala vestibuli communicate with each other only at the apex known as the helicotrema. The scala vestibuli winds toward the apex of the cochlea at the helicotrema becoming the scala tympani, which, in turn, coils back toward the round window. Thescala vestibuli and the scala tympani communicate with the middle ear via the oval window and round window, respectively. The scala tympani ends blindly at the round window membrane but the scala vestibuli opens up at that level into the perilymphatic space of the vestibulum. The cochlear duct connects with the vestibular system via due-Perilymph the perilymphatic space and cerebrospinal fluid through the cochlear aqueduct. tus reuniens located at the saccule. In this way, the three semicircular canals that comprise the vestibular system are filled with endolymph. Utricle The utricle is an elongated to oval-shaped portion of the membranous labyrinth lying superior to the saccule in the medial wall of the vestibule. It is larger in diameter than the semicircular ducts and receives both ends of each semicircular duct since the ganglion cells of basal and middle coils in modiolus; E, endosteal layer of bone; G, endochondral layer containing globuli interossei; P,periosteal layer; SM, scala media; ST,scala tympani; SV, scala vestibuli.r St, stapes. anterior and posterior ducts share a common opening. The macule of the utricle, located on the inferior surface of the utricle is a sensory end organ. The utriculosaccular duct usually arises from the utricle and communicates with the endolymphatic duct and also con-nects the utricle to the saccule. As previously indicated, the three semicircular canals communicate with the utricle via openings formed by the union of the nondilated or nonam-pullary ends of the superior and posterior canals termed the common crus. Saccule The saccule is located anteromedial to the upper (ante-rior) end of the utricle, and tends to be more round than the utricle. The saccule and the utricle are continuous via the utriculosaccular duct and with the cochlear duct by the ductus reuniens (also referred to as the canalis reuniens of Hensen). The macule of the saccule contains the sensory nerve endings of this portion of the inner ear and is an oval thickening on the lateral wall. Semicircular Canals The semicircular ducts include the anterior or supe-rior duct, the posterior duct and the lateral ducts. The end of each semicircular duct is expanded to form the ampulla. The anterior duct is directed anterolaterally, the posterior duct is directed posterolaterally, and the lateral ducts form a laterally directed angle of approximately 90 degrees between themselves. The bony or osseous canals follow a similar direction. The three semicircular canals communicate with the utricle via openings formed by the union of the non dilated or nonampullary ends of the superior and posterior canals termed the common crus. From the common crus, the anterior duct curves upward while the posterior duct curves backward and then downward. The other or ampullary ends of the semicircular canals contain the sensory endings of the ducts. At the ampullary ends, the anterior and poste-rior ducts empty into the utricle. The lateral semicircular duct lies in an approximate horizontal plane; both of its ends also connect to the utricle, with the anterior end being the ampulla. Endolymphatic Duct and Sac The endolymphatic duct traverses the medial portion of the petrous pyramid in its own bony canal, the vestibu-lar aqueduct. The endolymphatic duct can be divided into segments. The first segment is the dilated portion referred to as the sinus representing the common chan-nel into which the utricular and saccular ducts open. The next segment of the duct is narrow and is referred to as the isthmus. After the isthmus the duct widens again to become the endolymphatic sac. Most of the endolym-phatic sac is located within the funnel-shaped cranial aperture of the cochlear duct lying within a duplication of the posterior fossa dura partially covered medially by a thin bony shelf referred to as the operculum. The endo-lymphatic sac ends in a terminal dilatation or fovea of the sac. Two portions of the endolymphatic sac are recog-nized: a proximal rugose portion with an irregular lumen caused by numerous folds of the epithelial lining and a distal portion with a smooth epithelial lining. Both the endolymphatic sac and the duct show irregularly placed thin papillary outgrowths from their epithelial base into the lumen. These may sometimes be identified on radio-logical imaging in the living patient. The membranous vestibular system contains the recep-tor organs for sense of motion and position. The neural structures of the inner ear, including the VIII cranial nerve and the VII cranial nerve enter the inner ear through the internal auditory canal. INNER EAR INNERVATION The nerve to the inner ear is the VIII cranial nerve vari-ably referred to as the acoustic, auditory, or vestibuloco-chlear nerve. This nerve functionally consists of vestibular and cochlear divisions. In the internal auditory canal, these two parts are closely associated but at the lateral end of the canal the nerve trunk divides into three parts including two vestibular and one cochlear. The vestibular nerve arises from the bipolar cells of the superior and inferior divisions of the vestibular or Scarpa's ganglion located at the lateral end of the inter-nal auditory canal. Peripherally, the vestibular nerve divides into two main divisions, the superior and inferior divisions. The superior part of the ganglion gives nerves to the ampul-lae of the lateral and anterior canals and to thesaccular and utricle maculae. The inferior part of the gan-glion gives rise to a posterior ampullary nerve and a nerve to the saccule. The inferior part also gives rise to a branch to the cochlear division. The cells of origin for the cochlear nerve form the spi-ral ganglion, which represents the first of the four neurons between the auditory end organ and the auditory cortex. The spiral ganglion is located in coils of the modiolus at the base of attachment of the osseous spiral lamina . The osseous spiral lamina is a thin trabeculae of bone referred to as the habenulae perforata surrounding afferent nerve fibers that run from the organ of Corti to the acoustic nerve and efferent fibers to the outer hair cells that arise from the olivocochlear system of Rasmussen making their exit from the brain with the vestibular part of the nerve and joining the cochlear branch of the VIII cranial nerve via the vestibulocochlear communicating branch or nerve of Oort through the modiolus. Before reaching the modiolus, the nerve fibers are unmyelinated but are myelinated upon reaching the cochlear modiolus. The central fibers or axons of these bipolar neurons unite to form nerve bundles and pass from the cochlear modiolus through nerve channels in the osseous spiral foraminous tract into the internal auditory canal where they form the cochlear nerve. Within the internal auditory canal, the vestibulocochlear nerve is usually connected to the facial nerve. Together the three nerves enter the posterior cranial fossa, transverse the cerebellopontine angle and enter the brain stem at the posterior lower lateral aspect of the pons. The central audi-tory pathways consist of three additional neurons that form numerous connections with nuclei throughout the central nervous system as part of a complex auditory reflex system reaching the auditory cortex in the anterior transverse gyrus of the superior temporal lobe. The facial nerve enters the temporal bone through the internal auditory meatus within the petrous portion of the temporal bone in company with the VIII nerve and the internal auditory artery. The facial nerve then passes Bill's bar, which represents a pointed bony projection separating the facial nerve from the supe-rior division of the vestibular nerve. At the outer end of the canal, the facial nerve pierces arachnoid and dura to enter its own bony canal, the facial canal (fallopian canal or aqueduct of Fallopius). This canal continues for a short distance and the facial nerve comes to lie just above the cochlea where it bears the geniculate gan-glion. The greater petrosal nerve comes off the geniculate ganglion and passes anteriorly and medially to enter the middle cranial fossa. Immediately beyond the geniculate ganglion, the facial nerve turns sharply (external genu or geniculum) laterally and posteriorly. As it runs backward in the bone of the lateral wall of the vestibule (which is the medial wall of the tympanic cavity), the facial nerve inclines downward and laterally where the bone surrounding it forms a bulge or projection referred to as the prominence of the facial canal. This bulge or promi-nence is a normal finding and it may be large enough to cover the oval window and base of the stapes. The facial nerve then makes a broad curve downward to run almost vertically through the mastoid process to the stylomas-toid foramen where the facial canal ends and the nerve exits from the skull. Shortly before leaving the stylomas-toid foramen, the facial nerve gives off the chorda tym-pani, which is composed of sensory and preganglionic motor fibers. Slightly above the stylomastoid foramen, the chorda tympani leaves the facial trunk, takes a recur-rent course upward and forward in its canaliculus ("iter chordae posterius") to enter the tympanic cavity through its posterior wall. Within the tympanic cavity, it passes between the malleus and incus and leaves the tympanic membrane through a canal in the pterygotympanic fissure where it joins the lingual nerve to be distributed to the anterior two-thirds of the tongue and to the submandibular ganglion through which postganglionic fibers reach the submandibular and sublingual salivary glands. HISTOLOGY Osseous Labyrinth The cavity of osseous labyrinth surrounds and replicates the outline of the membranous labyrinth lying within it. The osseous labyrinth is extremely dense and includes three layers: an outer periosteal layer, an inner layer abutting the membranous labyrinth lined by a thin layer of internal periosteum (also referred to as endos-teum), a middle layer in which there is persistence of much of the calcified cartilaginous matrix referred to as globuli interossei or globuli ossei. The density of the osseous labyrinth is necessary to insulate and safeguard is necessary in maintaining the integrity and functions of hearing and balance. As noted by Michaels, the bone of the adult osseous labyrinth is neither lamellar or woven bone but "somewhere in between"; in contrast to other adult bone, the osseous labyrinth lacks the normal developmental process of removal and replacement of calci-fied cartilaginous matrix, lacks removal and replacement of primitive bone. Membranous Labyrinth The membranous labyrinth consists of epithelium-lined channels surrounded by connective tissue. The three basic divisions of the membranous labyrinth, including the semi-circular canals, the utricle and saccule, and the cochlear duct have similar structure, consisting of a specialized thickened epithelium surrounded by and attached to a fibrogelatinous membrane. The specialized epithelium con-sists of supporting cells and neuroepithelium or hair cells. The neuroepithelia have processes that project from the free edge of the cells. Cochlea The organ of Corti consists of neurotransmitting hair cells that rest on the basilar membrane and is arranged in a spi-rallike the duct itself. The organ of Corti consists of supporting cells and hair cells. The support-ing or pillar cells are of several different types. Among the more important supporting cells are the phalangeal cells which are arranged in two groups: an inner or single row of cells and an outer row of cells formed AM 8" of Corti; RM, Heissner's membrane; SL, spiral limbus; SP, spiral promi-nence; SV, stria vascularis; TM, tectorial membrane. from three to five rows of cells depending on the level of the cochlea with more rows of cells toward the apex and less rows of cells toward the base. The inner row of pha-langeal cells is associated with a single layer of hair cells; the outer row of phalangeal cells alternate with rows of hair cells. The phalangeal cells get their name from the shape of the stiff processes that project from the cells contributing to the reticular membrane that covers the free surface of the organ. The hair cells have numerous (40 to 100 per cell) "hairs" projecting from the reticular sur-face. The outer hair cells are more sensitive, are short and wedge shaped between the apices of the phalangeal cells in order to reach the basilar membrane and are believed to be responsible for the cochlear microphonics. The inner hair cells are long, less susceptible to damage than the outer hair cells and are believed to be less sensitive to sound. Intercellular spaces among the cells of the organ of Corti are apparently filled with intercellular substance. The largest of these spaces runs the entire length of the organ of Corti between inner and outer rows of phalangeal and hair cells and is referred to as the tunnel or canal of Corti. The tunnel of Corti is bounded by special supporting cells, the inner and outer pillars (Corti rods). The tunnel and pillars together form Corti's arch. The basilar membrane is a fibrous tissue that supports the organ of Corti. The basilar membrane has the tectorial membrane attached to it. The basilar membrane has fibers that pass from the bony spiral lamina to the spiral crest of the spiral ligament. The basilar membrane increases in T. hair cells; 0, outer hair cells; P,pillar cells; Te, tectorial membrane; Tu, tunnel of Corti.size from the base to the apex of the cochlea, and is felt to have resonator action with deformation of the membrane by sound beginning at its lower end traveling toward the heli-cotrema. The tectorial membrane is a gelatinous structure with numerous fine fibers. Like the basilar membrane, the tectorial membrane increases in size from the base to the apex of the cochlea, and is believed to have vibratory effect on the hair cells. Together, the organ of Corti and the basilar membrane form the spiral membrane, which is the floor or tympanic wall of the cochlear duct. The spiral ligament is a thickened modified portion of periosteum of the osseous cochlea, which forms the outer or curved wall of the cochlear duct and adjacent parts of the scalae. The vestibular, or Reiss-ner's membrane is thin and consists of two layers of cells: an inner cell layer of ectodermal origin consisting of epithelial-like clusters; an outer layer of mesodermal origin consisting of large, flat and elongated cells. This membrane forms the roof of the cochlear duct. In Meniere's disease (see later), the vestibular membrane bulges toward the scala vestibuli. In the outer wall of the cochlear duct is the stria vascularis, which is supplied by 30 to 35 small arteries originating from the modiolar region of the scala vestibuli and pass outward to the lateral wall of the osseous labyrinth. It is believed to be the source of the endolymph. The tissue spaces of the spiralliga-ment serve as a site of absorption. The stria vascularis is altered in ototoxic conditions as it may occur secondary to use of cisplatin, diuretic agents, and other drugs (see below under Presbycusis and Other Hearing Loss). Semicircular Canals, Utricle, and Saccule The end of each semicircular duct is expanded to form the ampulla. The sensory endings in the ampullae of the ducts are the cristae. Each crista consists of thickened epithe-lium; above each crista rests a gelatinous formation of vis-cous protein polysaccharide called the cupola. The hairs of the neuroepithelial hair cells project into the base of the cupola. As a result of the gelatinous nature of the cupola, it may be bent by the pressure of the endolymph, which apparently stimulates the hair cells and, therefore, the nerve endings of the cristae. The utricle and the saccule, representing the two main membranous structures of the vestibule, are lined by a sen-sory epithelium known as the macula. The maculae are identical to one another in structure and are similar to the cristae of the semicircular canals. By trans-mission electron microscopy, these sensory cells are of two types: type 1cell is flask shaped with a swollen basal por-tion; type 2cell is cylindrical. Type 1cells are attached to fibers of the sensory nerves by a wide chalice-like terminal and the terminal of type 2 cells is connected by button-like attachments of the nerve. The sensory epithelium consists of hair cells which, in turn, have stiff, immotile projections embedded in the gelatinous otolithic membrane. In the otolithic membrane are also embedded Nerves and Paraganglia Most cranial and spinal nerves have glia extending only a fraction of a millimeter beyond their external origins. The optic nerve contains neuroglia throughout its length and, thereby, really is a tract of brain rather than a true nerve. The exception to the other cranial nerves is the VIII nerve, which typically has glia extending from 6 to 8 mm along its course . This distribution of glia along the VIII nerve helps in explaining the greater occurrence of glial tumors on this nerve as compared to the other cranial nerves. The ves-tibular and cochlear divisions are fused near the entrance to the internal auditory meatus; at this location, the nerve changes in appearance from pale staining proximally to dark staining distally. This change in appearance is the result of the abrupt transition of the coverings of the nerve fibers from the pale staining oligodendroglia to the darker staining Schwann cells. This glial-Schwann sheath junction of the VIII nerve is referred to as the Obersteiner-Redlich line. Acoustic neuromas (also referred to as vestib-ular neuromas) may arise anywhere between this junction and the cribrosa area at the fundus of the canal. Paraganglia similar in structure to the carotid body are identified in the ear and may give rise to jugulotympanic paragangliomas. Most the paraganglia are found in relation Higher power of part of , showing macule of saccule. crystalline bodies referred to as otoliths that contain cal-cium carbonate and a protein suspended in a jelly-like poly-saccharide. It is only in the presence of otoliths that the maculae differ from the other sensory areas of the ear. ofthe ultrastructure of vestibular hair cells showing the principal features of type Iand type IIhair cells and their sup-porting cells. (From Nager GT.Anatomy of the membranous cochlea and vestibular labyrinth. In: Nager GT, ed. Pathology of the Ear and Temporal Bone. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins; 1993:3-48, with permission.)Type II hair cellType I hair cell Cilium ---:1lm and its basal body nerve calyx ribbon A B N. olfcctorius-> - - - - - - - - - - "';: r "~.".---------------------___, -0.5 Schematic illustra-tion of the cranial and spinal nerves showing that most of the nerves have glia extending for only a frac-tion of a millimeter beyond their external origins with the exception of the optic nerve which is really a tract of brain given the presence of neuroglia throughout its length and the VIII nerve. The VIII cranial nerve typically has glia extending from 6 to 8 mm along its course. (From Heffner OK. Low-grade adenocarcinoma of probable endolymphatic sac origin. A clinico-pathologic study of 20 cases. Cancer 1989;64:2292-2302, with permission.)N. opticus -------------- •••••••••••••••••••••••• N. oculomotorius·--------- -0.6 N. trochlearis ------------ ------------------------ -0.6 N. trigeminus {~.:::: ::::::.~~~~~~~~;;;;;;;;;;~~~~~~~~t:~j N. abducens ------------- ------------------------, -0.5 N. facialis -- - - --- - --------JIII~~==================3':~:g N. intermedius {~~=::::: - l:.(0. 1 N. acusticus {V. -----------c. ----------N. glossopharyngeus {~'. :::~~~~;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;J:<~: ~ {cePhOliC root [.1 3Nn. Vagus- smell mediol ~-' ~ _<00:.51 . I' roots ::----.j~~======================t. spmo IS -----~=======================laccessorius Co.udal ro~t- ,Sptnalporhon--- L ---' <0.1 N. hypoglossus -- - -- - - _ (0.1 to the jugular bulb, and a minority are found under the mucosa of the medial side of the middle ear promontory. Endolymphatic Sac and Duct The lining epithelium of the endolymphatic duct is low cubical and the epithelium of the endolym-phatic sac is taller and has a papillary appearance . An aggressive neoplasm, termed endolymphatic sac papillary tumor, is presumed to originate from the endolym-phatic sac epithelium. This tumor, initially considered locochlear nerve are fused near the entrance to the internal auditory meatus. At this location is the glial-Schwann sheath junction also referred to as the Obersteiner-Redlich line where the nerve changes in appearance from pale staining proximally to dark staining distally owing to the abrupt transition of the coverings of the nerve fibers from the pale staining oligodendroglia to the darker staining Schwann cells.to represent a low-grade malignancy, is potentially a locally destructive but not metastatic tumor characterized by variably appearing epithelium, includ-ing nondescript low-cuboidal to papillary and glandular-appearing neoplasm. Patients with this tumor often describe symptoms similar to those occurring in Meniere's disease including vertigo and spinning of the room. This tumor has been found to be associated with von Hippel-Lindau disease, including the identification of the VHL gene. side of middle ear over promontory. The tympanic membrane is on the right. Gornori's reticulin stain. duct is lined by low cubical epithelium. COMPOSITION AND CIRCULATION OF THE PERILYMPH AND ENDOLYMPH Perilymph, which is partly a filtration of CSF and partly a fil-tration from blood vessels of the ear, has a similar chemical composition as CSF, resembling extracellular fluid with low potassium and high sodium concentrations. The similarities of perilymph and CSF support the concept that perilymph is derived from CSF. The anatomical basis for this concept is based on the consideration that because of the opening of the cochlear aqueduct into both the subarachnoid and perilymphatic spaces, an increase in CSF pressure results in flow into the labyrinth. The perilymphatic spaces of each osseous semicircular canal are continuous on both ends with the perilymphatic space of the vestibule and this space is continuous with the scala vestibuli, which is continuous with the scala tympani at the helicotrema. All perilymphatic spaces open wide into each other. Due to areas of discontinuity or deficiency in the compact bone of the petrous portion of the temporal bone, foci of communication may exist between the peri-lymphatic space and other cavities. Such areas of potential thelium arranged on papillae.communication include the middle and inner ear via the round and oval windows. In addition, the vestibular and cochlear aqueducts and the foramina for the nerves and blood vessels of the inner ear serve as potential channels between the inner ear and the cranial cavity. Endolymph is an intracellular-like fluid containing high potassium and low sodium concentrations. Endolymph con-tains more than 30 times as much potassium as does peri-lymph or CSF but about one-tenth as much sodium. Endolymph has a low protein content; its protein is entirely globulin instead of an admixture of globulin and albumin. It has a viscosity similar to the vitreous of the eye due to its high mucopolysaccharide content. The electrolyte concen-tration of the endolymph is critical for normal functioning of the sensory organs. It is generally believed that the main source of endolymph is the stria vascularis, as well as the epithelium of the ampullae of the semicircular ducts as well as the epithelium of the maculae of the utricle and saccule. Endolymph circulates through the cochlear duct (scala media) downward to the base of the cochlea, then through the ductus reuniens into the saccule and then into the endolymphatic sac and duct where it is reabsorbed. The cochlear duct communicates with the vestibular endolymph-containing sacs through two canals so that the endolymphatic system is, like the perilymphatic system, a continuous one. CONDUCTION OF SOUND Conduction of sound occurs via air and via bone. The pinna and external auditory canal conduct sound waves in air to the tym-mal patients with Down syndrome have external ears that are smaller, low set and have an incompletely developed superior helix. panic membrane. Conduction of sound by air is less efficient when compared with the ossicular route. The ossicular chain, including the malleus, the incus, and the stapes, enhances the sound energy transmission by conveying vibrations from the tympanic membrane to the footplate of the stapes lying on the oval window of the vestibule which in turn is in contact with the perilymph. From the vestibular perilymph, vibrations derived from sound waves pass directly to the perilymphatic spaces of the cochlea, first via the scala vestibuli (upper com-partment) ascending from the oval window and then to the scala tympani descending to the round window. The walls of the endolymph containing scala media or cochlear duct, lying in between the perilymph containing scala vestibuli and scala tympani, receives waves of vibrations from the perilymph. Through the endolymph, the waves of vibra-tions affect the sensory cells of the organ of Corti, the sensory organ of sound reception located in the scala media or cochlear duct, from where it passes to the cochlear nerve with transmis-sion via central pathways to the cerebral cortex.