It is not until pregnancy that full development of the breast occurs in humans. During pregnancy, epithelial cell prolif-eration resumes. There is a dramatic increase in the number of lobules as well as in the number of acinar units within each lobule secondary to epithelial cell proliferation and lobuloalveolar differentiation under the influence of estro-gen, progesterone, prolactin, and growth hormone; growth is further enhanced by adrenal glucocorticoids and insu-lin. This lobular development and expansion occurs at the expense of both the intralobular and extralobular stroma. By the end of the first trimester, there is grossly evident breast enlargement, superficial venous dilatation, and increased pigmentation of the areola. During the second and third trimesters, lobular growth continues and the acinar units begin to appear monolay-ered. The myoepithelial cells in the acini are difficult to discern at this time due to the increase in size and volume of the epithelial cells, but they remain clearly evident in the extralobular ducts. The cytoplasm of the epithelial cells becomes vacuolated, and secretion accumulates in the greatly expanded lobules. After parturition, the lactating breast is characterized by distension of the lobular acini as a result of accumulated abundant secretory material and prominent epithelial cell cytoplasmic vacuolization. Many units composed of a lactiferous duct and associated sebaceous gland. and dilated. There is minimal intervening stroma. B. Higher-power view illustrates prominent epithelial cell enlargement, cytoplasmic vacuolization, and protrusion of cells into the acinar lumen. Some of the cells have a hobnail appearance. Myoepithelial cells are inconspicuous. of the epithelial cells have a bulbous or hobnail appear-ance and protrude into the acinar lumina. Myoepithelial cells remain attenuated and inconspicuous. The florid changes seen in pregnancy and lactation can be alarming to the inexperienced observer; areas of infarction, which occasionally occur in the pregnant breast, may com-pound the problem. When lactation ceases, the lobules involute and return to their normal resting appearance. Involution usually pro-ceeds unevenly and takes several months. Involuting lob-ules are irregular in contour and are frequently infiltrated by lymphocytes and plasma cells. Occasionally, an isolated lobule showing secretory changes may be seen in the breasts of women who are not pregnant. Although this is often called a residual lactating lobule, it may occur in the nulliparous woman as well. , A'MENOPAUSE During the postmenopausal period, with the reduction of estrogen and progesterone levels, there is involution and atrophy of the mammary TDLUs, with reduction in the size and complexity of the acini, and there is loss of the spe-cialized intralobular stroma. Ducts may become variably ectatic. The postmenopausal breast is character-ized by a marked reduction in glandular tissue and collag-enous stroma, often with a concomitant increase in stromal adipose tissue. The end stage of menopausal involution is typified by remnants of the TDLUs, typically composed of ducts with atrophic acini, surrounded by hyalinized connec-tive tissue or embedded within adipose tissue with little or no surrounding stroma. atrophic ductules. B.In this specimen, a few residual, atrophic lobular acini are evident in a fibrotic stroma, which has replaced the normal, loose intralobular stroma.