We have limited this discussion of regional neuroanatomy to those principles of structural organization that are of practical value to the diagnostician, emphasizing the rudi-ments of neuroembryology by which the basic organization of the nervous system is best understood. Further details about topographical neuroanatomy can be found in the list of suggested readings provided at the end of the chapter. Organization of the Spinal Cord and Brain Stem Embryologically, the nascent eNS begins as a hollow tube formed by the invagination of the neural plate ectoderm. This primitive cylinder is subdivided functionally into a dorsal sensory Calar") plate and a ventral motor Cbasal") plate. The two are separated by a lateral groove, termed the "sulcus limitans," along which develops the efferent auto-nomic system. This primitive organizational pattern is retained, essentially unaltered, in the mature Spinal cord Brainstem r-r--------Basal plate Floor plate Median sulcus ThoracicTegmentumMedulla Vestibular nuclei Dorsal horn Sulcus limitans Lateral hornand vagal nucleusHypoglossal nucleus ~Base Ventral horn Inferior olivary nuclei Pyramidal tracts Sacral Tegmentum Pons Vestibular nuclei Dorsal horn"<;Sulcus limitans .~. Lateral gray and sallvatory?iBasenuclei : Ventral hornAbducens nucleus Ponto-cerebellar fibers spinal cord. The central gray matter consists of: dorsal horns that receive sensory input from the dorsal roots, ventral horns that contain motor neurons whose axons are conducted to the somatic periphery by the ventral roots, and the lateral autonomic gray matter. Spinal autonomic neurons are confined to thoracic and sacral levels, forming the intermediolateral cell columns. The axons of these "preganglionic" neurons exit the spinal cord through the ventral roots, ultimately to synapse on "postganglionic" neurons in the peripheral autonomic ganglia. The sympathetic intermediolateral cell column produces a third horn of gray matter in the thoracic cord, termed "the lateral horn". The parasympathetic intermediolateral cell column occupies a similar lateral position in the sacral cord (at the S-2, S-3, and S-4 levels), but does not form a distinct horn.Spinal Cord The anatomy of the spinal cord varies according to the level. Two enlargements of the ventral horns, one in the cervical region and another in the lumbosacral region, provide motor inner-vation for the upper and lower extremities, respectively. In contrast, the ventral horns of the thoracic cord provide innervation for the more limited axial musculature of the trunk and are, accordingly, much smaller. As mentioned earlier, the lateral horns of the gray matter (sym-pathetic neurons) are a unique feature of the thoracic cord. The thickness of the surrounding white matter fiber bun-dles also varies with the cord level, being greatest in the cervical cord, where the thickness reflects the summated accrual of ascending fiber tracts that have successively entered at lower levels, as well as the maximum content of descending tracts that are en route to lower lev-els, and thinnest in the lumbosacral cord. The terminus of the spinal cord, the filum terminale, is composed primar-ily of meningeal connective tissue in the human and is dis-cussed separately with the pia-arachnoid. Brain Stem The brain stem is innately more complex than the spinal cord, but its basic organization is readily understood when viewed as a slightly modified version of the basic plan. Thus, the stem is also a neural tube, but one that has been stretched dorsally and splayed out laterally so that the ven-trally located embryonic motor plate is now medial and the dorsal sensory plate is lateral. Therefore, within the brain stem the cranial nerve motor nuclei are located medially, the sensory nuclei laterally, and the auto-nomic nuclei are intermediate in position. The brain stem can be further subcategorized in cross section into tectum, tegmentum, and base. The tectum is the roof of the ventricular system, as exemplified by the superior and inferior colliculi of the midbrain and the superior medullary vela of the pons and the medulla. The tegmentum forms the floor of the is illustrated in these cross sections taken from the cervical enlargement, midthoracic cord, and lumbosacral enlargement. The cervi-cal enlargement is typified by an oval shape with large white mat-ter funiculi and prominent, broad anterior gray horns which contain the motor neurons that innervate the upper extremities. In contrast, sections from thoracic cord have a more rounded profile and exhibit small, slender, peg-like anterior gray horns. In addition, lateral horns, which house the intermediolateral cell column neurons of the sympathetic ner-vous system, are unique to thoracic segments. The lumbosacral cord has very large anterior gray horns (motor supply to the lower extremities) like those of the cervical enlargement, but only a very small surrounding mantle of white matter. cerebral aqueduct and fourth ventricle, and is divisible into the medial motor and lateral sensory areas discussed previ-ously. The "base" is located subjacent to the tegmentum and is the most ventral portion of the stem. It is composed principally of the so-called "long tracts," that is, the descending motor pathways and ascending sensory pathways that link the spinal cord with higher neural cen-ters. The combination of long tract signs with dysfunction of specific cranial nerves allows for the precise anatomic localization of brain stem lesions by clinical examination. Cerebellum Embryologically, the cerebellum arises as a dorsal outgrowth of the fetal brain stem and remains connected to it in the adult by the three pairs of cerebellar peduncles: The supe-rior, middle, and inferior. They join with the midbrain, pons, and medulla, respectively. The cerebellum is com-posed of three structural and functional compartments: Cortex, medulla, and deep nuclei. The cortex displays three distinct laminae: An outer hypocellular molecular layer, an intermediate single-cell thick Purkinje cell layer, and a deep hypercellular granular cell layer . Before 1 year of age, the cerebellar cortex is conspicuous for remnants of a fourth layer of small neurons, the fetal external granular cell layer, which is located imme-diately subjacent to pia. The external granular cells are gradually depleted during the first year of life as they descend the processes of Bergmann glia to reach their final position in the internal granular cell layer. Embedded within the white matter of the cerebellar medulla are four pairs of nuclei, from medial to lateral: Fastigial, globose, emboliform, and dentate. The dentate is by far the largest, and is usually the only deep nucleus seen on routine sections. Its serpigi-nous profile is strikingly similar to that of the inferior olivary nucleus of the medulla oblongata, which is a major source of afferent fibers to the cerebellum. The Purkinje cell dendritic arbor extends into the molecular layer like a hand with outstretched fingers. Its broad, flat palm and radiating fingers are oriented perpen-dicular to the long axis of the cerebellar convolutions. Thus, routine folia cross sections show the typical, elabo-rate dendritic branching pattern, whereas longitudinal sec-tions present a dramatically different "on edge" view of the arbor. This should not be mistaken for patho-logic dendritic tree "pruning" seen in some disease states. Diencephalon The diencephalon is interposed between the brain stem and the cerebrum. Four major divisions are recognized: Epithalamus (pineal gland Cerebellar cortex: The adult cerebellar cortex is com-posed of three layers-an outer hypocellular molecular layer, a middle Purkinje cell layer, and an inner densely populated granular cell layer. Whereas the Purkinje cells are prototypically neuronal in appearance, the small cells of the granular layer are hardly recognizable as neurons by traditional histologic criteria. A cross section of a cerebellar folium shows the typical broadly branching Purkinje cell dendritic arbor. However, sections taken parallel to the folia reveal the streamlined "on edge" appearance ofthe arbor, which should not be interpreted as pathologic pruning. The fetal cerebellumhas an addi-tional cortical lamina, the external granular layer, applied to the surface of the cortex. This pool of cells populates the internal granular cell layer during development and is, thereby, depleted by the end of the first year of postnatal life. and habenula), thalamus, subthalamus, and hypothalamus. The medial and lateral geniculate nuclei of the thalamus are sometimes considered together as the metathalamus. The strategic location of the thalamus is related to its major role in processing and relaying information passing between the cerebral cortex and brain stem and spinal cord. All sensory data are pro-cessed by specific thalamic nuclei before distribution to the primary sensory cortices. Of clinical Significance to the pathologist, certain por-tions of the diencephalon immediately subjacent to the third ventricle, in particular, the large dorsomedial nuclei of the thalamus and the mamillary bodies of the hypothala-mus, are often prominently involved in Wernicke's encepha-lopathy. The lesions at these sites are postulated to account for the memory disturbance that accompanies this disorder. Cerebrum Supratentorially, the CNS becomes so much more complicated that it is difficult to describe in terms of any general pattern of orientation. Itremains a hollow structure, but one that is no longer easy to consider as a tube of foldings and regional over-growths. In light of this complexity, it is appropriate to review only those areas that are of particular diagnostic relevance. Basal Ganglia The term hasal ganglia refers to the deep gray matter masses of the telencephalon and encompasses the caudate broadly divisible into two components-the superficial cortical gray matter mantle and the deep gray nuclei. The latter are known as the basal ganglia, and consist of the caudate nucleus. putamen. globus pallid us. and amygdala. The lenticular nucleus is com-posed of the medially situated, diffusely myelinated globus pallidus and the laterally placed putamen, whose myelinated fibers are grouped into slender fascicles known as the pencil bundles of Wilson. The inter-nal capsule separates the lenticular nucleus from the caudate and the thalamus.Gray matter bridges occasionally span the capsule to connect the caudate and putamen, a reflection of the close functional relationship between these two nuclei. The lenticular nucleus receives its blood supply from several lenticulostriate arteries, which are direct branches of the middle cerebral artery, and is the most common site of intracerebral hypertensive hemorrhage and lacunar infarction. The large lenticulostriate artery coursing through the lateral putamen was known in former times as Charcot's artery, or, more color-fully, as the artery of internal hemorrhage. The lenticulostriate vessels are often surrounded by dilated perivascular spaces that should not be mistaken for lacunar infarcts. nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus, and amygdala . The term ganglion was formerly used interchange-ably with nucleus, and ganglion cell was synonymous with neuron to earlier neuroanatomists. With the exception of the basal ganglia, the current definition of a ganglion is now generally restricted to mean a collection of neuronal cell bodies located outside the CNS, namely, the sensory and autonomic ganglia of the peripheral nervous system. Ref-erence to CNS neurons as ganglion cells is still occasion-ally encountered, and this historical sense of the term is reflected in the names of such neoplastic entities as gan-glioglioma, ganglioneuroma, and ganglion cell tumor. The amygdala is located in the mesial temporal lobe immediately rostral to the hippocampus, and is functionally related to the limbic system. The remain-ing nuclei of the basal ganglia play an integral role in themodulation of motor function, and probably participate in other higher neural systems as well. The caudate nucleus, as the name implies, has a long tapering tail that intimately follows the curvature of the lateral ventricle. The cau-date is morphologically and functionally closely related to the putamen. These two nuclei are appropriately referred to collectively as the neostriatum, or simply striatum. For descriptive purposes, the putamen and the medially situ-ated globus pallidus are collec-tively referred to as the lentiform nucleus. The putamen and pallidum are separated from one another by the external medullary lamina of the pallidum, whereas the pallidum is itself divided into medial and lateral segments by the internal medullary lamina. The globus pallidus Cpale globe") is so named because of its pale appearance in the fresh state compared to the putamen. This contrast is attrib-utable histologically to the dense meshwork of myelinated fibers in the pallidum. In contrast, myelinated axons in the putamen are grouped into slender fascicles ("pencil bundles of Wilson") that project medially to the pallidum and to the substantia nigra. The histologic appearance of the lentiform nucleus is distinctive and permits unambiguous identifica-tion of even very limited amounts of tissue from this site. The basal ganglia are prominently involved in a variety of pathologic processes, including kernicterus (literally, "nuclear jaundice") in the neonate and lacunar infarction in adults. Carbon monoxide poisoning classically produces selective necrosis of the inner segment of the pallidum. A frequent incidental finding of no diagnostic Significance on routine sections of the lentiform nucleus is micronodular mineralization of small blood vessels, which is typically most prominent in the globus pallidus. Histologically, simi-lar micronodular mineralization is also commonly seen in the hippocampus. Hippocampal Formation The hippocampal formation comprises the subiculum, Ammon's horn, and dentate gyrus. In coronal sections of the medial temporal lobe, the subiculum forms the inferior base of the hippo-campal formation, joining the parahippocampal gyrus with Ammon's horn. Ammon's horn, routinely abbreviated CA, is divided into four regions, CAl through 4, on the basis of cytologic architecture and syn-aptic connectivity. (This nomenclature was introduced by Lorente de No in 1934.) CAl arches superiorly, forming, along with CA2, the medial floor of the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle. The dorsally situated CA2 is usually recognizable by the greater compactness of the pyramidal cell layer, as compared to CAl. CA3 forms a descending medial arch that terminates in the hilus of the dentate gyrus. The final segment of Ammon's horn, CA4, lies within the hilus of the dentate gyrus and is often referred to as the end-plate. CAl, essentially equivalent to Sommer's sector, is the zone that is most sensitive to various insults, includ-ing seizures, ischemia, and Alzheimer's disease changes. In horn [cornu Ammonis, abbreviated as CA; divided into regions CA1-4), and the dentate gyrus lA,B). CAlis equivalent to Sommer's sector and is the region of the hippocampus that is most sensitive to a variety of insults. In contrast, the adjacent CA2 region is known as the dorsal resistant zone. Two common incidental findings are also illustrated-micronodular mineralization IB,C), which is also seen in the globus pallid us, and a residual hippocampal fissure IB,D), which should not be misinterpreted as a healed infarct. CN, tail of the caudate nucleus; HF,residual hippocampal fissure; LGN, lateral geniculate nucleus (note the "Napoleon's hat" profile and distinctive lamination); MM, micronodular mineralization. contrast, the adjacent CA2 segment is known as the dorsal resistant zone, in recognition of its relative sparing com-pared to the other three sectors. The exquisite sensitivity of CAl to injury, with sparing of the adjacent CA2, is routinely observed as mesial sclerosis of the hippocampus, which is seen in many temporal lobes resected for intractable epi-lepsy. The classic histologic description of the pattern of neuronal loss in Ammon's horn was based on observations made on the brains of such epileptic patients by Wilhelm Sommer in 1880; E.Brotz coined the term Sommer's sector in 1920. There are several notable features that are frequently encountered incidentally in the examination of routine hip-pocampal sections and can be mistakenly interpreted as evidence of disease. One is an asymptomatic micronodular mineralization comparable to that seen in the pallidum. In the hippocampal formation, it is most commonly seen justoutside the apex of the dentate gyrus. A second common finding is a residual hippocampal fissure, which produces a rarefied lamina or cystic cleft that can be mistaken for a healed infarct. In addition, pyramidal neurons of Ammon's horn are often dark and shrunken in autopsy material and care must be taken not to overinterpret such changes as evidence of antemortem ischemia. Cerebral Cortex From antiquity, neuroscientists have sought to divide the cortical mantle into discrete, functionally significant units. Early efforts yielded fanciful maps akin to those of phre-nology and physiognomy. More recently, the application of light microscopy and special staining techniques for cell bodies, dendritic arbors and unmyelinated axons, and the myelin sheaths of myelinated axons (myelin stains such as the Weil, Weigert, and Luxol fast blue methods) have permitted a more scientific approach, although the details are beyond the scope of this chapter. In brief, the parcellation of the cortex is based on regional vari-ation in the relative number, composition, and distribution of cortical neurons and their processes (cytoarchitectonics and myeloarchitechtonics). Many neuroanatomists have divided the cortex into a number of regions varying from 20 to more than 200, depending on the particular morphologic criteria and degree of subtlety employed. Currently, the most popular cortical map is that devised by Korbinian Brodmann in 1909. Brodmann's map and the classical nomenclature for the gross anatomy of the cerebral sulci and gyri are the two systems most commonly used at pres-ent for reference purposes in the neuroanatomical and clin-icalliterature. Within the context of even the simplest cortical map, it is generally not possible to assign a given histologic sec-tion of cortex to a precise anatomical locus without prior knowledge of the section's provenance. However, two corti-cal areas do exhibit distinctive features: Primary motor cor-tex and primary visual cortex. The motor cortex, located on the precentral gyrus of the frontal lobe, is distinguished by the presence of the giant pyramidal cells of Betz. Pyrami-dal cells generally range from 10 to 50 urnin soma height from base to origin of the apical dendrite. By comparison, Betz cells may exceed 100 urnin soma height. The primary visual cortex, located on the banks of the calcarine fissure of the medial occipital lobe, is remarkable for the pres-ence of a prominent "external band of Baillarger," termed the "line of Gennari." This myelinated stratum located in lamina IV is usually visible to the naked eye and permits exact delineation of the primary visual cortex from the adjacent visual association cortex. CELLULAR CONSTITUENTS OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM Gray Matter and White Matter By volume, most of the CNS is composed of gray matter and white matter. Specialized types of CNS tissues include the choroid plexus, the pineal gland, the circumventricular organs, and the infundibulum and neurohypophy-sis. The hallmark of gray matter A) is the presence of neuronal cell bodies embedded within a finely textured eosinophilic background termed neuropil. Neuropil is an interwoven meshwork of neuronal and glial cell pro-cesses. The individual neurites that compose the neuropil are not generally distinguishable in routine hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections, but are resolvable at the ultrastructural level. White matter, in contrast, is composed primarily of myelinatedaxons and the supporting cells, oligodendroglia, that pro-duce and maintain the myelin sheaths. Neurons Normal Microscopic Anatomy The prototypical neuron is exemplified by the large mul-tipolar Betz cells of the motor cortex, the alpha motor neurons of the ventral horn of the spinal cord, and the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum. These neurons are char-acterized by large perikarya with abundant Nissl substance (rough endoplasmic reticu-lum), robust dendritic arborizations, and large nuclei with prominent single nucleoli. Such large mul-tipolar forms, however, represent only one type of neu-ron; the diapason of neuronal morphologies is exceedingly broad. This is readily apparent by comparison of alpha motor neurons with granular cell neurons A, D). These two neuronal populations typify the classical dichotomous subdivision of CNS neurons into large extro-verted projection neurons with long axons (Golgi type I neurons) and small introverts that function regionally with restricted connections. Between these two poles is a full spectrum of neuronal sizes and shapes, with an equally impressive variety of dendritic arbor configurations. The details of the latter are gener-ally appreciable only with special stains for neuronal pro-cesses. The cell processes of neurons are separated into two categories: Axons, of which each neuron only has one, and dendrites, which are often multiple. With respect to morphologic variants, one unique popu-lation of CNS neurons merits brief mention. The mesence-phalic nucleus of the trigeminal nerve, which is concerned chiefly with the mediation of jaw proprioception, is com-posed of true primary sensory neurons that possess only a single process emanating from the cell body. This nucleus constitutes the only intrapa-renchymal example of this class of neurons; all other primary sensory neuronal perikarya are gathered outside the CNS in the spinal and cranial nerve ganglia. Immunohistochemistry Antibodies have been raised against a wide variety of the many unique neuronal proteins that are being isolated and characterized at an ever-increasing rate. Most of these markers are confined to use for research purposes but sev-eral have found utility in the diagnostic laboratory. One of the earliest such markers, neuron specific enolase, has proven notoriously unreliable as a marker of neuronal differentiation. Its use for this purpose in evaluating neo-plasms of the CNS is not recommended. Antibodies directed against epitopes on the constitu-ent proteins of neurofilaments, which are major cytoskel-etal elements of the neuronal perikaryon and cytoplasmic processes, have been used extensively in both experimental and clinical studies. One of the most useful and widely employed neuro-nal markers is synaptophysin. Synaptophysin is an integral membrane protein of synaptic vesicles. In the normal ner-vous system, antisynaptophysin antibodies yield a diffuse, finely granular pattern throughout the gray matter neuropil. In addition, punctate granular decoration is seen along the cell bodies and proximal dendrites of sev-eral types of large, projection class neurons, including the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum, alpha motor neurons of the spinal cord, extraocular motor neurons of the brain stem, and Betz cells of the precentral gyrus. Age-related Neuronal Inclusions A variety of inclusions, largely intracytoplasmic, appear with increasing frequency as we age. By far, the most common Gray matter and white matter: Gray matter contains abundant neuropil sur-rounding large neurons and smaller astrocytes and oligodendroglia. Neuropil is the term used for the fine amorphous eosinophilic back-ground matrix of the eNS that fills the space between the cell bodies of the various cellular constituents as seen on H&E stains. Ultra-structural examination shows the neuropil to be composed of myriad intimately intermingling processes of the cellular constituents.White matter, in contrast, is composed primarily of oli-godendroglia and the axons that they myelinate, and displays a much more uniform, homoge-neous appearance. is lipofuscin, whose yellow-to-pale brown color is unaltered by most histologic procedures, including the H&E method. Its auto-fluorescence and partial avidity for the acid-fast stain can be used to visualize differentially this "wear and tear" pigment, although little functional significance is gener-ally assigned to lipochrome accumulation in normal aging. In larger neurons, lipofuscin may accumulate to such an extent that it displaces organelles, and creates an appear-ance similar to the cell swelling of central chromatolysis, described below. The lateral geniculate body provides an example of a densely populated nucleus whose constituent neuron's prominent accumulation of lipofuscin is often discernible macroscopically as a distinctly mahogany hue compared to adjacent cortex. Interestingly, of the spinal cord, include a large cell body with abundant cytoplasmic Nissl substance' cytoplasmic processes, and a large nucleus with a single prominent nucleolus. The large process extending to the right is clearly recog-nizable as a dendrite by its content of Nissl substance, whereas in this fortuitous section, the smaller process extending to the left is identified as the neuron's axon by its lack of Nissl substance. Axons are further distin-guished from dendrites by their non-tapering profile. The non-tapering profile ofaxons is easily recognized in white matter.The extremes of neuron size and shape are readily apparent from a comparison of a large motor neuron with the small granular cell neurons of the cerebellar cortex that approximately the same size as a motor neuron's nucleolus! lipofuscin accumulation is not simply a function of cell size because some classes of large neurons appear comparatively immune to significant accrual, for example, the cerebellar Purkinje cells. Functionally, more significant neuronal inclusions that may be seen in asymptomatic individuals are those asso-ciated with Alzheimer's disease. They are neurofibrillary tangles, neuritic plaques, granulovacuolar degeneration, and Hirano bodies. These illustrate the often ill-defined distinction between health and disease, because these changes can be seen in the elderly, albeit in limited numbers, in the absence of antemortem disturbances of mentation. In some cases, neurofibrillary tangles may be found in asymptomatic individuals in occasional neurons of the subiculum or Ammon's horn. Although silver stains greatly aid visualization and quantitation, these structures may beidentified on routinely stained H&E sections if the observer is familiar with their appearance. In pyramidal cells they appear as a slightly basophilic wisp of faintly fibrillar mate-rial that extends out into cell processes, most notably the apical dendrite, and they are often more prominent on one side of the nucleus. This morphology reflects the fact that tangles generally con-form to the shape of the cell body. For example, in the pig-mented neurons of the locus ceruleus, which are multipolar and lack the dominant apical dendrite of pyramidal neurons, tangles that are globular in shape are occasionally encoun-tered as an incidental finding. The senile plaque is also a manifestation of cell injury, but one that, like slight atherosclerosis, is not an unex-pected finding in the brains of asymptomatic adults. In such individuals, the plaque is usually seen in its primitive form as a somewhat ill-defined, roughly circular region of ron. These large neurons possess only a single cell process, an axon, with an absence of dendrites. Unipolar neurons are primary sensory neurons and the only example of this class of neuron within the eNS is the mes-encephalic nucleus of the trigeminal nerve in the upper pons and midbrain lateral to the periaqueductal gray matter. All other unipolar neurons are located in the peripheral nervous system ganglia. The dorsal root ganglia of the spinal cord provide a good example, with large unipolar neurons surrounded by satellite cells. Ganglionic neurons typically display cytoplasmic pigment and their cell bodies and axons are strongly positive for phosphorylated neurofilament proteins. • skeleton of neurons and their processes. As illustrated in the cerebellar cortex, specific antibodies directed against either nonphosphorylated or phosphorylated NFPs differentially identify cell bodies and den-drites or axons, respectively. tion. The neuropil of gray matter, which is rich in synaptic contacts, shows a diffuse, finely granular pattern. Several specific types of large projection class neurons show prominent punctate decoration of the cell body and proximal dendrites, as illustrated here by a motor neuron in the hypoglossal nucleus of the medulla. Other groups of large neurons exhibiting this pattern of synaptophysin immunopositivity include Purkinje cells of the cerebellum, motor neurons of the ventral horn of the spinal cord, and Betz cells of the precentral gyrus in the cerebral cortex. abnormal argyrophilic neurites that is not visualized in the H&E-stained section. As the plaques mature they become visible in the latter preparation, particularly when a central core of eosinophilic amyloid appears. The latter can be more readily seen by Congo red or periodic acid-Schiff staining. As noted earlier, both neurofi-brillary tangles and neuritic plaques are more easily identi-fied and quantitated with special techniques such as immu-nofluorescence or silver stains. Two additional intraneuronal inclusions that are seen in Alzheimer's disease, but only rarely in nondemented individuals, are GVD and Hirano bodies.As the name implies, the inclusion of GVD consists of a dark, basophilic granule inside a small, clear vacuole. Clus-ters of these cytoplasmic inclusions may be present within a single neuron. Depending on the plane of section, Hirano bodies appear in H&E-stained sections as brightly eosinophilic oval, elliptical, or elongated rod-like refractile inclusions that are located either in very close apposition to a neuronal perikaryon, or within the neuropil. Ultrastructural examination supports localization in neuronal cell bodies and processes, and immunohistochemical studies reveal the presence of actin and actin-associated proteins. Unlike neurofibrillary tangles age, as seen for example in the lateral geniculate nucleus, can result in peripheral displacement of the nucleus and Nissl substance, mimicking central chromatolysis. As a practical application of normal neurohis-tology, the presence of lipofuscin can sometimes aid in the identification of neurons in intraoperative frozen sections. As illustrated here, a neuron, identified by its lipofuscin content, is surrounded by tumor cells, thereby supporting a diagnosis of infiltrating glioma. A c and neuritic plaques, both GVD and Hirano bodies exhibit a very limited neuroanatomic distribution and are, in fact, virtually confined to the hippocampal formation. Encoun-tering more than one or two cells with these alterations should raise the issue of Alzheimer's disease and prompt a search for other attendant histologic features. A Neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques: Neurofibril-lary tangles may be seen sporadically in the hippocampal formation of aging brains and have a fibrillary texture in H&E-stained sections. Mature senile plaques deform the smooth texture of the neuropil and appear in H&E-stained sections as spherical, somewhat granular foci with a central eosinophilic core that is composed of amy-loid. Note that adjacent myelinated axons are focally displaced as they pass by the plaque. In earlier stages, the plaques are less well defined and are not identifiable in H&E-stained sections. Although both neurofi-brillary tangles and large mature neuritic plaques can be seen in H&E-stained sections, use of special techniques, such as silver stains' greatly facilitates visualization and quantitation. A particularly striking cytoplasmic inclusion occasion-ally encountered in routine sections of the hypoglossal nuclei of the medulla (less often in the ventral horn motor nuclei of the spinal cord) is the hyaline inclusion. These inclusions, which consist of ectatic cisternae of endoplasmic reticulum, are rarely seen in the B tangles, both of these intracytoplasmic inclusions can occasionally be seen in the hippocampal formation of normal older individuals. However, although these alterations are not pathognomonic for dementing illness, an appreciable number of affected cells should prompt a search for the evidence of Alzheimer's disease in the form of a thorough examination for senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. sions, as seen in the neuron on the right, may be observed sporadically throughout the neuraxis but are most commonly encountered in the large motor neurons of the hypoglossal nuclei in the medulla (as in this micrograph). Less frequently, they may be seen in the motor neurons of the ventral horn of the spinal cord. Electron microscopic examination reveals ectatic cisternae of endoplasmic reticulum. first few decades of life, but appear with increasing fre-quency thereafter. They are occasionally mistaken by the uninformed for viral inclusions. Catecholaminergic neurons throughout the brain stem gradually accumulate neuromelanin as a by-product of neurotransmitter synthesis. The largest and most densely populated of these nuclei is the substantia nigra ("black substance"), which contains dopaminergic neurons. The locus ceruleus, which is also seen by the unaided eye, is a collection of noradrenergic neurons in the rostral pontine tegmentum. It is of practical importance that the Lewy bodies of Parkinson's disease can be found in both of these neuroanatomic locales. Of the smaller and more diffusely distributed pigmented neurons, those in the vicinity of the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve in the medulla oblongata are most commonly encountered during routine histologic examination. Microscopically, neuromelanin appears as coarse, dark brown granules, and should not be confused with mela-nocytic melanin. The latter is also present in the CNS, but is confined to leptomeningeal melanocytes as discussed below. Several eosinophilic inclusions may be seen in pig-mented brain stem neurons. The most striking of these are the commonly encountered Marinesco bodies B). These bright red, hyaline-appearing structures are located within the nucleus, often adjacent to and about the same size as a nucleolus (an alternative designation is "paranucleolar body"). Multiple Marinesco bodies may occur within a single nucleus and, in some cases, a large percentage of pigmented neurons exhibit these eye-catching inclusions. In such cases, they may raise concern about a viral infection to the unaccustomed observer, but are notpathologic and have yet to be correlated with any significant process except advancing age. Two types of eosinophilic inclusions may be encountered in the cytoplasm of pig-mented neurons. Clusters of diminutive acidophilic gran-ules are occasionally noted but have no pathologic significance. Lewy bodies, in contrast, are much larger, notably displace the cytoplasmic neuromelanin from which they are separated by a small clear halo, and are asso-ciated with Parkinson's disease. Autolysis and Basic Neuronal Reactions to Injury As captured in their normal state by perfusion fixation or rapid immersion fixation, neurons are generally rotund with lightly eosinophilic cytoplasm that is stippled with baso-philic Nissl substance in the case of the larger neurons. The surrounding glia are inconspicuous and few clear vacu-oles are seen. This perfection in fixation is rarely achieved in human material, however, and virtually in all autopsy and surgical specimens, autolysis alters this ideal appear-ance to a greater or lesser extent. Neurons are, thereby, rendered somewhat contracted and basophilic. Nuclei are also somewhat condensed. Simultaneously, the processes of glia that surround neurons and blood vessels imbibe water to produce clear vacuoles. The neuro-nal response to injury overlaps in some cases with these autolytic changes, and it may not be possible to distinguish agonal hypotensive injury from autolysis in autopsy speci-mens. In the former setting, the neuronal contraction is pronounced and the perineuronal and perivascular spaces are exceptionally prominent. There are, however, three neuronal changes that pro-vide unequivocal evidence of antemortem injury. One is the "red" neuron, which is the sine qua non of ischemic damage. The second is central chromatolysis, and the third is ferruginization. The "red" neuron is characterized by a shrunken cell body and intense cytoplasmic eosinophilia with complete loss of Nissl basophilia. The nucleus is dark and usually lacks a distinguishable nucleo-lus, but may be pale and demonstrate early karyolysis. At times, it has a somewhat fragmented look suggesting kary-orrhexis, although clearly defined karyorrhexis is rare. In surgical specimens, tissue-handling artifact ("crush" arti-fact) also results in dark, shrunken neuronal perikarya; however, as with autolytic autopsy specimens, these cells lack the distinctive cytoplasmic eosinophilia of ischemia. Central chromatolysis, the second unequivocally abnormal finding, consists of a loss of central basophilic staining of the cell body with peripheral margination of the Nissl substance. It is seen in a num-ber of pathologic states (the ballooned anterior horn cells of poliomyelitis being the classical example). There are numerous mimickers that lie in wait for the unwary. For example, some normal neuronal populations, such as the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus and the dorsal nucleus of Clarke of the thoracic spinal scattered catecholaminergic neurons distributed widely throughout the brain stem. Two large populations are vis-ible grossly: The substantia nigra of the midbrain and the locus ceruleus of the pons. Marinesco bodies are eosinophilic, spheroidal, paranucleolar bodies that are often observed in the nuclei of pigmented neurons, especially those of the substantia nigra. The number of Marinesco bodies increases with advancing age and can be quite striking in some individuals. They should not be mistaken for intranuclear viral inclu-sions. Clusters of minute intracytoplasmic eosinophilic granules, seen in this micrograph to the left of the nucleus, may occasionally catch the eye of an obsessive observer. They have no known pathologic significance and are much smaller than Lewy bodies, which are the characteristic intracytoplasmic inclusions of Parkinson's disease. neuron. As illustrated here by a Purkinje cell of the cerebellum and pyramidal neurons of the hippocampal CAl region, the soma is shrunken, the cytoplasm is intensely eosinophilic, and the nucleus is pyknotic with no discernible nucleolus. It is largely the pronounced eosinophilia that distinguishes this cellular alteration from autolytic neuronal condensation, in which the cytoplasm is dark and basophilic. contrast to ischemic insult, in "crush artifact" the cyto-plasm is dark and basophilic rather than brightly eosinophilic. cord, display Nissl substance that is preferentially dis-tributed peripherally in the soma. Other neurons, such as those of the mesencephalic nucleus of the trigeminal nerve discussed previously, have large, exquisitely rounded somas and, hence, mimic that aspect of chromatolysis. The giant pyramidal cells of Betz in the motor cortex are so large in comparison to surrounding neurons, that at low magnification they may give an initial impression of chromatolytic swelling. Finally, as discussed earlier, one must be careful not to mistake the accumu-lation of various substances that displace the Nissl sub-stance peripherally, such as lipofuscin, for central chroma-tolysis. A striking finding sometimes encountered near old infarcts is the presence of ferruginized or fossilized neu-rons, in which both perikarya and axons are encrusted by blue-staining minerals. This arresting swelling with peripheral displacement of the nucleus and lipofuscin can be a response to either intrinsic neuronal disease (such as in polio-myelitis or other viral infections) or to interruption of the axon in close proximity to the cell body. In the latter setting, the term axonal reaction is applied. Mineralized neurons: These encrusted relics resembling petrified tree trunks are most commonly encountered around the margins of old infarcts. phenomenon is not limited to the vicinal tissue of old infarcts, although this is the most common context, nor is it confined to the adult nervous system, because prenatal insults may result in similar findings. Clusters ofaxons thus affected can be mistaken for fungal hyphae. A common reaction ofaxons to injury seen in a wide variety of pathologic states is the formation of localized dilatations known as axonal spheroids or axon "retraction balls". Ultrastructural examination shows greatly distended axis cylinders filled with bundles of neu-rofilaments and cellular organelles. A regional variant of this process may be observed in the granular cell layer of the cerebellum where focal dilatations of Purkinje cell axons are termed torpedoes. These structures are seen in a num-ber of cerebellar degenerative diseases as well as in normal aging. The most common site in the CNS where scattered axonal spheroids are routinely encountered as an incidental finding in aged individuals is in the rostral fasciculus gracilis of the medulla. Spheroids in this location are often mineralized. a superficial resemblance to fungal hyphae. injury that are seen in a wide array of pathologic conditions including radiation damage and post-traumatic diffuse axonal injury. Axonal spheroids are also frequently encountered incidentally in older individuals in the dorsal medulla oblongata where, as in this example, they are often mineralized. Astrocytes Normal Microscopic Anatomy Like neurons, astrocytes are also heterogeneous. The cells of one class conform to the classic star shape, and occur as either the fibrillary or protoplasmic form. Fibril-lary astrocytes populate the white matter, whereas the lat-ter inhabit the gray matter. Other important subtypes of astrocytes include the "pilocytic" astrocytes of the periven-tricular region, cerebellum, and spinal cord, and the Berg-mann astrocytes, which are distributed in a narrow lamina between the cell bodies of Purkinje neurons in the cerebel-lar cortex. In gray matter, nuclei of protoplasmic astrocytes can-not generally be distinguished from those of small neurons because the cytoplasm of both, blends imperceptibly into the surrounding neuropil and is not normally discernible as a discrete entity. In white matter, it is usually difficult in H&E-stained sections to distinguish fibrillary astrocytes from the much more numerous oligodendroglia. The nuclei of oligodendrocytes are smaller and more hyperchromatic, but usually these two cell types do not fall into two clearly defined groups. In sections stained for myelin, a very small amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm may occasionally, but not invariably, be seen surrounding normal astrocytic nuclei. This helps distinguish this cell from the oligodendrocyte whose cytoplasm, other than the myelin sheath, is not usu-ally apparent by conventional light microscopy (see . Astrocytic cytoplasm becomes much more promi-nent when astrocytes respond to eNS injury, culminating in the abundant glassy cytoplasm of the gemistocyte (see . To appreciate the distinctive morphology of the star cell, one must visualize its radiating processes. These thread-like extensions reach out to define a sphere of influence that is many times greater in extent than one would have suspectedby looking at an H&E-stained section alone. Historically, this tinctorial feat was achieved through the technically capricious metallic impregnations, but now is accom-plished with considerably greater ease and predictability by the immunohistochemical localization of glial fibrillary acidic protein. In the case of the fibrillary astrocyte, processes branch infrequently, whereas those of the protoplasmic astrocyte are more numerous and divide more frequently They are often less well stained with GFAP than the fibrillary types. Neither type of resting astro-cyte is as apparent immunohistochemically as are reactive astrocytes. The polar forms of astrocytes include the pilocytic and Bergmann types. The pilocytic astrocyte is not conspicu-ous in its native state, but becomes so when responding as gliosis and forming Rosenthal fibers. The latter are hya-line, often corkscrew-shaped, eosinophilic structures that are wedged within one of the cell's bipolar processes (see . These structures are occasionally seen in normal brains in the hypothalamus or pineal gland, but become much more prominent in gliosis about such lesions as craniopharyngiomas, pineal cysts, cerebellar hemangio-blastomas, and chronic lesions of the spinal cord. The Bergmann astrocytes are confined to a one-to-two-cell thick lamina. Their polar processes extend to the pial surface of the cerebellum and are only faintly seen with difficulty in standard sections. Yet, they are well visualized with immunohistochemistry for GFAP and at the margins of old cerebellar infarcts. The Bergmann glia provide an excellent illustration of astrocytic special-ization. Their processes are a form of scaffold and serve as a reminder of the cooperative interplay between astrocytes and neurons during embryologic development. At that time, the small neurons of the external granular cell layer spiral down the Bergmann processes to reach their final destina-tion in the internal granular cell layer. rons. Bergmann astrocytes have cell bodies distributed in a narrow lamina of the cerebellar cortex coexten-sive with that of the Purkinje cells. Each cell sends an elongated process through the molecular layer to the subpial surface. These processes are not usually well seen in healthy cerebellum with routine H&E staining. An equally striking unmasking of this elegant architecture is often seen withoutthe use of specialized staining techniques in areas of cerebellar cortex adjacent to healed infarcts, in which the degree of ischemia was sufficient to kill the indigenous neuronal populations but spared the more resistant Bergmann glia. Like other astrocytes throughoutthe eNS, Bergmann glia respond to ischemic insult by proliferating, resulting in an increased thick-ness of the cell body lamina referred to as "Bergmann gliosis". Age-related Inclusions in Astrocytes: Corpora Amylacea The ubiquitous corpora amylacea are, by far, the most salient astrocytic inclusions encountered in routine sec-tions. These faintly laminated, slightly basophilic poly-glucosan bodies accumulate with age and are observed in greatest numbers where astrocytic foot processes are most numerous, particularly around blood vessels and beneath the pia. The olfactory tracts of adults are also typically rich in corpora amylacea (see . The similarity between corpora amylacea and fungal yeast forms such as cryptococcus is a source of potential diagnostic error since both are strongly positive for methe-namine silver, alcian blue, and PAS. In some individuals, corpora amylacea are strikingly numerous although no pathologic significance has yet been attributed to this abundance.Astrocytic Reactions to Injury Although normally among the most morphologically demure of nervous system constituents (only naked nuclei are typi-cally visible on routine H&E histology), astrocytes respond rapidly and dramatically to CNS injury. This response typi-cally consists of two components: Hypertrophy and hyper-plasia. The initial hypertrophic response, an increase in cell size and cytoplasmic prominence, occurs rapidly fol-lowing CNS insult. Conspicuous cytoplasm is generally indicative of reactive gliosis and constitutes prima facie evi-dence of CNS injury. Reactive astrocytes display a broad range of cytoplasmic quantity, from just barely perceptible to robustly embonpoint. The latter cells are known as gemistocytes. Gliosis may, of course, also present as an increase in the number and density of astrocytic nuclei without attendant cytoplasmic prominence. This chronic type of gliosis is frequently subtle c •• processes with age, most prominently in subpialand perivascularlocations. Corpora amylacea can resemble fungal yeast forms and show strong positivity for fungal stains such as PAS-fungusand Gomori methenamine silver. and often requires special stains for confirmation and quan-titation. The end result of acute reactive astrogliosis, such as that accompanying cerebral infarction, is frequently a dense fibrillary gliosis. The often-invoked anal-ogy of the astrocyte as the "fibroblast of the CNS," that is, a ubiquitously distributed cell with mitotic capability that responds with alacrity to a wide range of deleterious stimuli, is quite apt. A distinctive cytoplasmic inclusion seen in fibrillary astrogliosis is the Rosenthal fiber. These strikingly eosinophilic, elongated, anfractuous structures are observed in a wide variety of reactive states that share in common significant chronicity Rosenthal fibers are also characteristic of several specific nosologic entities, includ-ing Alexander's disease and, perhaps most widely known, juvenile pilocytic astrocytoma. It should be stressed, how-ever, that Rosenthal fibers may be strikingly abundant in the chronically compressed glial stroma surrounding a large number of non-neoplastic conditions and slowly expanding nonglial tumors (such as cranio-pharyngioma). There are several specialized forms of reactive astro-gliosis that deserve brief description. Reactive astro-cytes with multiple small nuclei, termed "Creutzfeldt astrocytes," may be seen in a number of reactive states, but are especially typical of demyelinative processes. A specific type of astrocytic reaction to injury is seen in a variety of hepatic diseases that produce hyperammonemia. The reaction consists of nuclear changes exclusively: Swelling with contor-tion of the nuclear membrane, chromatin clearing, and development of one or two prominent nucleoli . In sharp contrast to all of the other types of reac-tive astrocytes, these Alzheimer type II astrocytes fail to exhibit prominent cytoplasm by routine H&E microscopy. Alzheimer type II astrocytes may be seen throughout the neuraxis but are particularly promi-nent in certain locations, most notably the globus pallidus. Alzheimer type I astrocytes differ from type II astrocytes panel is proof of an insult to the nervous system. Under normal conditions, only bare nuclei are usually seen. The extensive, radiating cytoplasmic processes for which the astrocyte received its name are most readily appreciated when reactive astrocytes are immunostained for GFAP. Reactive astrocytes have been descriptively classified according to the amount and configuration of visible cytoplasm, and include the aptly named gemistocytic "laden" or "stuffed" cell,and pilocytic "hair cell" types. Reactive gemistocytes are typical of the acute astrocytic reaction to eNS damage whereas dense fibrillary gliosis is commonly seen in longstanding lesions such as healed infarcts. in displaying abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and are only seen with frequency in Wilson's dis-ease. As the eponyms imply, both types of reactive astrocytic morphologies were described by Alois Alzheimer and have no relationship to the dementing disease of the same ilk. Among astrocytic reactions to injury, none is more strik-ing than that observed in some cases of progressive mul-tifocalleukoencephalopathy. Not infrequently, the most eye-catching aspect of a PML biopsy is an alarming nuclear hyperchromatism and pleomorphism exhibited by scattered astrocytes-a vignette that has on more than one occasion elicited a mental frisson from even the most expe-rienced observer. Perivascular clearing is a routinely observed artifact of autolysis. By electron microscopy, these clear spaces are revealed to be greatly dilated astrocytic perivas-cular foot processes. This phenomenon of water imbibitionby astrocytes is seen both as an autolytic change in virtually all autopsy specimens and, when extreme, as a marker of antemortem hypoxic/ischemic injury. Oligodendroglia The oligodendroglia are small cells that are active in the formation and maintenance of myelin and in the, as yet, poorly understood capacity of attending to neuronal cell bodies. In white matter, the oli-godendrocytes' obligatory orientation to fiber pathways is occasionally made apparent by a fortuitous plane of sec-tion wherein the fascicular distribution of these cells is seen. In gray matter, oligodendrocytes are encountered as two-to-three small, dark nuclei that are pressed against the cell membrane of larger neurons (Fig-ure 11.31). In surgical specimens obtained from infiltrat-ing gliomas, these normal satellite oligodendroglia must be distinguished from infiltrating neoplastic cells that, like fiber formation. Rosenthal fibers are brightly eosinophilic, lumpy, elongated structures that by ultra-structural examination, appear as electron-dense amorphous masses surrounded by and merging with dense bundles of glial filaments.Occasionally, the two most common intracytoplasmic inclusions of astrocytes, corpora amylacea, and Rosenthal fibers, may be seen together in the same astrocytic process. tive reactive astrocytes can be seen in a variety of pathologic conditions, but are particularly characteristic of demyelinating diseases. termed Alzheimer type II and Alzheimer type I astrocytes, are associated with hyperammonemic conditions. They were described by Alois Alzheimer and bear his name but have nothing to do with the dementing disease that was also a subject of the famous neurologist's investigations. By far, the most frequently encountered are Alzheimer type II astrocytes. Typical features include an enlarged pale nucleus with an irregular contour and one or more small nucleoli. In marked contrast to other types of reactive astrocytes, visible cytoplasm is lacking. Alzheimer type II astrocytes are commonly seen in a wide variety of diseases that result in increased blood ammonia. In contrast, Alzheimer type I astrocytes have large, irregularly lobulated or multiple nuclei and clearly discernible eosinophilic cytoplasm. These cells are not seen in most hyperammonemic diseases, with the exception of hepatolenticular degeneration. their non-transformed counterparts, are attracted to the immediate perineuronal region. Both astrocytomas and oli-godendrogliomas may exhibit such satellitosis, but it is most prominent in the latter neoplasm. Generally, the nuclei of the neoplastic satellites are larger, more pleomorphic, and more coarsely constructed than the normal orbiting cortical oligodendrocytes. Identification of normal oligodendroglia in both gray and white matters is greatly facilitated by these cells' perinuclear reactive astrocytes are sometimes the most striking finding in a PML biopsy and can be mistaken for neoplasia by the unprepared.halo, which results from swelling and vacuolation of the cytoplasm A). This is analogous to the perivascular swelling and vacuolation of astrocytic foot processes. In oligodendrog-lial neoplasms, the perinuclear halo is a well-known, distinctive, and diagnostically useful fea-ture. Oligodendroglia and their neoplastic counterparts exhibit strong immunopositivity for S-l 00 pro-tein. Ependyma This cuboidal-to-columnar epithelium provides a lining for the CNS ventricular system and spe-cializes focally as a covering for the choroid plexus (see . The ciliated nature of the ependyma is readily appreciable in the child but is generally less so thereafter. Tanycytes are spe-cialized constituents of the ependyma whose elongated abluminal processes reach the subependymal vasculature. Thus, these cells provide a physical link between the ven-tricular, vascular, and intraparenchymal compartments of the CNS. Tanycytes are most numerous in the modified ependyma covering many of the CVOs. Visualization of these cells is best effected through use of the Golgi stain. The closely apposed ependymal surfaces of the tips of the lateral ventricle horns frequently fuse dur-ing development, resulting in cords of ependymal cell nests and rosettes. This is especially typical of the dis-tal portions of the posterior horns in the occipital lobes A sis: This common artifact of routine tissue processing is observed by light microscopy as apparent perivascular clearing of the neuropil. As seen by electron microscopy, the clearing is due to dilated astrocyte foot processes The white matter in such areas appears pale and can simulate the rarefaction seen after ischemic insult. Detached ependymal rosettes may be encountered subjacent to the ventricular lining at any location through-out the neuraxis. The ependyma-lined central canal of the spinal cord is patent in the child but generally becomes obliterated about the time of puberty, unless obstructive hydrocephalus is present. In the latter case, the canal may remain patent and even become dilated. In the normal adult, however, the spinal ependymal cells have completed their role as a generative epithelium and remain as scattered clumps and rosettes. Occasional identified, even at low power, as rows of nuclei queuing up between fascicles of myelinated axons.sections of adult spinal cord may exhibit a focally patent central canal. The primary ependymal response to injury is loss. The resultant focal denudation of the ventricular wall is often accompanied by a proliferation of local cells, the subependymal glia. This nonspecific reaction, termed granular ependymitis, is the potential product of a broad range of disparate etiologies, from viral infection to hydrocephalus. It is seen frequently at autopsy as a very focal, limited response and has, in this setting, little diagnostic significance. The normal epen-dyma is commonly thrown into folds, termed plicae, in many parts of the ventricular system. These normal undulations should not be confused with granular ependymitis. Microglia and the Monocyte-Macrophage System Normal Microscopic Anatomy The small, dark, elongated nuclei of microglia are ubiqui-tous in the normal brain. They are so small and inconspicu-ous in H&E-stained sections, however, that they are rarely noticed. They must be distinguished from the commonly encountered tangential or en face sections of endothelial cells, which possess similarly elongated, albeit somewhat larger and plumper, nuclei. Special staining techniques such as the classic silver carbonate method, the more predictable lectin histochemistry (Fig-ure 1l.37B), and immunohistochemical markers such as Ham-56 uncloak the dendritic processes of microglia and permit unambiguous visualization. By these techniques, microglia are seen to be strikingly pervasive throughout the eNS parenchyma. occasional astrocytes and microglia. This affinity of normal oligo-dendroglia for neuronal perikarya is often retained by their neoplas-tic counterparts, oligodendrogliomas, in the form of "neoplastic sat-ellitosis". Non-neoplastic oligodendroglial hyperplasia can also be seen, as for example in some cases of longstanding epilepsy. lia exhibit characteristic perinuclear halos. This "fried egg" appearance is an artifact of hypoxia/ischemia and delayed fixation, and is a useful diagnostic feature that is also exhibited by oligo-dendrogliomas. Oligodendroglia, both normal and neoplastic, typically show strong nuclear immunopositivity for S-l00 protein. robust ciliated-columnar epithelium to nearly squamous flattened cuboidal. The relative abundance of cilia and the height of the ependyma vary with anatomic location and both decrease with age. The hypocel-lular fibrillary zone located immediately subjacent to the ependyma is known as the subependymal plate and contains scattered glia as single cells and in small clusters. Glia of the subependy-mal plate respond to ependymal injury with a proliferative response termed granular ependymitis (see A). Subependymomas originate from the glia of the ependyma and subependymal plate. Response to Injury In contrast to the relative passivity and anonymity of microglia in healthy nervous tissue, their activity is by no means subtle when called to action by parenchymal injury. Two variants are seen: Microglial nodules and dif-fuse microgliosis. Microglial nodules (also called microg-lial stars) are frequent concomitants of viral or rickettsial infection; and they are generally acknowledged to consist of both astrocytes and microglia. The may be found subjacent to the ependymal lining of the ventricular sys-tem throughout the neuraxis. They are particularly common in areas where opposed ventricular surfaces fuse during development, such as at the tips of the lateral ventricle horns, especially the occipital horns, and at the lateral angles of the fourth ven-tricle. These normal rosette clusters are occasionally sampled in surgi-cal specimens and should not be misinterpreted as the evidence of the disease.microglia have an elongated shape and are known as rod cells. A form of glial nodule is also seen about degenerat-ing neurons, as in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Diffuse microgliosis is equally distinctive. In this context, the rod-shaped nuclei of microglia may be present in such num-bers as to be easily identified; however, the full extent of microgliosis is often best appreciated through immunohistochemistry for markers such as CD68 or HAM-56. Destruction of nervous tissue, by whatever mechanism, generally elicits a macrophage response that serves to clear nonviable debris. Both the activation of autochthonous tissue microglia and the diapedesis of blood monocytes are sources for these scavengers. The weight of evidence suggests that the recruitment of blood monocytes plays a predominant role in large lesions such as infarcts, but that the supply of indigenous cells is sufficient for lesser insults. Macrophages are proliferative cells. Mitotic figures will, therefore, usually be present in disease processes that elicit a macrophage response, such as infarc-tion and demyelination. They should not be interpreted as suggestive of a neoplastic process. Macrophages often contribute substantially to the cellularity of tissue samples and, depending on preservation and fixation conditions, their identity may not always be obvious. For example, in some specimens, clearing of the macrophage cytoplasm lends an appearance similar to that of oligodendroglial cells, to the extent that, together with the attendant hyper-cellularity, an infiltrating glioma might be suspected. In such instances a number of antibodies, such as KP-1 or Ham-56, can be used to identify the macrophage compo-nent. the ciliated columnar ependymal lining expected in a young individual. In contrast, the central canal of adults is typically obliterated over much of its length, with only residual small nests and occasional rosettes of epen-dymal cells 18). exophytic fusiform proliferation of the subependymal glia constitutes granular ependymitis IA).Despite the implication of an inflammatory etiology inherent in the name, this common alteration can result from many diverse insults, ranging from hydrocephalus to viral infections. Normal undulations of the ependyma 18), termed plicae, should not be confused with granular ependymitis. A B their classical rod-shaped nuclei on routine H&E staining IA).Dendritic processes, often bipolar, are vividly demonstrated by lectin staining 18). • A nodules are focal hypercellular collections of microglia together with reactive astrocytes that commonly form as a response to viral and rickettsial infections. In dif-fuse microgliosis, seen in a variety of conditions, including ischemia, the charac-teristic elongated rod-shaped nuclei can be identified on H&E-stained sections, but the true extent of their presence is more accurately visualized through immunohisto-chemistry, as seen here with HAM-56. SPECIALIZED ORGANS OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM Pineal Gland The pineal body presents a singular histologic appearance among eNS tissues with a promi-nently lobulated architecture. This glandular appearance might be mistaken for carcinoma by the unwary, and it can be difficult to distinguish the nor-mal pineal gland from a well-differentiated pineocytoma in small surgical specimens.Generally present in the pineal gland after puberty are corpora arenacea. These mineralized concretions accrue with age and confer the radiologic hyperdensity that, before the era of comput-erized tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, made the normal midline position of the pineal gland a use-ful radiologic landmark. The increase in corpora arenacea with senescence is accompanied by gradual gliosis and cystic change, with attendant effacement of the lush glandular appearance of the pineal gland seen in the earlier decades of life. The ubiquitous incidental pineal cysts typically have densely gliotic walls with scattered Rosenthal fiber formation 8 phages from other cellular constituents ofthe nervous system. Cognoscenti of the literature will be familiar with a number of colorful appellations given these cells in former times, including Gitter cells and compound granular corpuscles. Macrophages are mitotically active cells and populations responding to CNS injury are readily labeled with proliferation markers such as the monoclonal antibody MIB-l. Mitotic figures are, thus, to be expected in tissue samples from a wide range of non-neoplastic conditions that elicit a macrophage response, including infarcts and demyelinative diseases. In hypercellular biopsies, macro-phages can be separated from other cellular constituents by a number of commercially available antibodies such as Ham-56 The investing leptomeninges of the pineal gland contain arachnoid cell nests that occasionally give rise to meningiomas of the pineal region. Pineocytes express strong immunopositivity for the neu-ronal marker synaptophysin. This useful phenotypic marker is retained by most pineal parenchy-mal neoplasms. In addition to pineocytes, the pineal gland also contains an indigenous population of astrocytes whose distribution is revealed by immunostaining for GFAP. Median Eminence and Infundibulum The median eminence, infundibulum, and neurohypophy-sis display a unique constellation of morphologic features that reflect their specialized neuroendocrine functions. The background stroma is highly spindled and contains nodular microvascular tangles termed gomi-toli, spherical granular bodies calledHerring bodies, which are stor-age sites for oxytocin and vasopressin, and scattered cells bearing lipofuscin-like brown pigment. The constellation of features comprising a highly spindled Normal Herring bodies of the neurohypophysis Reactive Granular bodies adjacent to vascular malformations and conditions with iron deposition Neoplastic Pilocytic astrocytoma Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma Ganglioglioma situ reveals the typical mineralized concretions variously referred to as corpora arenacea, acervuli cerebri, or simply brain sand. Superior to the pineal gland are the paired internal cere-bral veins, and between them is the supra pineal recess ofthe third ventricle which is lined with ependyma and often contains a tuft of choroid plexus. The loose connective tissue, in which all of these structures are located, is called velum interpositum. The calcification ofthe pineal gland increases with age and was, thereby, quite useful as a radiographic midline marker prior to the advent of contemporary high resolution neuroimaging modalities. Also seen in this radiograph of a normal adult brain are prominently calcified tufts of choroid plexus in the atria of both lateral ventricles. background, vascular tangles and granular bodies gives this region of the CNS more than a passing resemblance to pilocytic astrocytoma. An additional incidental finding, particularly in tissue sections of the infundibulum, is the presence of small clusters of granular cells, termed granular cell tumorlets. Olfactory Bulbs and Tracts The intracranial components of the olfactory apparatus have a very distinctive histologic appearance. Familiarity with these structures is useful, not only for the neuropathologist, but also for the general surgical pathologist who may encounter them in resections performed as part of the surgical treatment for regionally invasive entities of the nasal and paranasal sinuses. In such situations, the surgical pathologist may be called upon to render an intraoperative frozen-section assessment of tissue resected superior to the cribriform plate. The ability to recognize the normal histologic fea-tures of olfactory bulb tissue is, thus, of more than pedan-tic importance. The olfactory bulb has a laminar organization . The outer layer is composed of spindled bundles of entering olfactory nerve fascicles intermixed withdistinctive spherical, anuclear areas that constitute specialized zones of synaptic contact between olfactory nerve collaterals and the dendrites of intrinsic olfactory bulb neurons. Mitral cells are large neu-rons, so-named for a resemblance of the perikaryon shape to a bishop's mitre. Their cell bodies are located in a lamina deep to that of the glomeruli. The deepest layer consists of a thick lamina of granular cell neurons that are comparable in size to those of the cerebellum and dentate gyrus. The olfactory tracts (sometimes incorrectly referred to as olfactory nerves) extend posteriorly from the olfactory bulbs. They are triangular in cross section and, in adults, are notable for their profuse numbers of corpora amylacea. Choroid Plexus The choroid plexus is a specialized organ of the CNS that is responsible for the production of cerebrospinal fluid. Itis found in the body, atrium, and temporal horns of the lateral ventricles, in the interventricular foramina of Monro, in the roof of the third ventricle, and in the roof and lateral recesses of the fourth ventricle. The frontal and occipital horns of the lateral ventricles and the aqueduct other region of the eNS. Salient features include a prominent lobular organization with connective tissue septa and pineocytic rosettes. The latter impart a distinctly neuroendocrine character. Two additional histologic features of note are the ubiquitous incidental pineal cysts, whose walls typically exhibit astro-gliosis with scattered Rosenthal fibers, and arachnoid cell nests of the investing velum interpositum that occasionally provide a source for meningiomas arising in this region. mal tumors) are strongly immunopositive for the neuronal marker synaptophysin. As expected, the indig-enous population of pineal astrocytes are well visualized with antibodies directed against GFAP. of Sylvius are devoid of choroid plexus. The plexus is most obvious in the atria of the lateral ventricles (see B, 11.47), where prominent bilateral tufts (glomera choroidea) are formed. Cystic xanthomatous change is a common incidental finding in these botryoid structures. The plexus is also a normal resident in the subarachnoid Median eminence, infundibulum, and neurohypophysis: This unique region of the eNS exhibits three distinguishing histologic features: A highly spindled stroma composed of pituicytes IA), promi-nent capillary tangles of the hypothalamo-hypophyseal portal system called gomitoli 18), and spherical, eosinophilic axonal specializations for the storage of oxytocin and vasopressin called Herring bodies IC). This constellation of highly spindled stroma, vascular tangles, and granular bodies bears a resemblance to pilocytic astrocytoma. The presence of lipofuscin-like pigment is also very characteristic 10). Small clusters of granular cells I"granular cell tumorlet"] may be seen, particularly in the infundibulum IE), as an incidental finding, but occasionally reach a sufficient size to produce compression of the infundibulum and subse-quent clinical presentation with mildly elevated serum prolactin ("stalk effect"). space of the cerebellopontine angle cisterns, which it reaches from the lateral recesses of the fourth ventricle by protruding through the foramina of Luschka . The paired foramina of Luschka, which open laterally into the ventral basilar CPA cisterns, are to be distinguished from the single foramen of Magendie SAS tive laminar organization. The most superficial layer, termed the glo-merular layer is covered by the leptomeninges and the subarachnoid space. The glomerular layer displays a unique architecture, with spindled olfactory nerve fascicles intermixing with spherical hypocellular synaptic zones called glomeruli.Deeper lay-ers include the external plexiform, mitral cell, internal plexiform, and granular cell layer. Deeper still is the anterior olfactory nucleus. A working familiarity with olfactory bulb histology is essen-tial for the surgical pathologist as this structure is frequently seen in the frozen section laboratory during resection of superior nasal cav-ity tumors that may invade the cribriform plate and overlying olfactory bulbs. A, which opens in the dorsal midline into the cis-terna magna. Microscopically, choroid plexus consists of invaginated fronds of vascular leptomeninges covered by an ependyma that is modified to become a highly secretory epithelium. The cells are larger and more cobblestoned than those of the adjacent ependyma. In addition to collagen and blood vessels, small nests of menin-gothelial cells are common normal habitues of the choroid plexus; whorls of these cells frequently give rise to psammoma bodies. Nonspecific deposition of mineral salts also occurs commonly throughout the connective tissue core with increasing age and accounts for most of the plexuses' radiodensity. An additional aging change of no specific pathologic significance is cytoplasmic vacuolization of the ependyma-derived lining cells C, D). Circumventricular Organs The CVOs comprise a diverse group of specialized CNS centers that share two morphologic features: A periventric-ular location and vasculature that lacks the characteristic blood-brain barrier properties found throughout the rest of the brain and the spinal cord. There are six CVOs: The pineal gland, subfornical organ, organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis, area postrema, subcommissural organ, and the median eminence-infundibulum-neurohypophysis. Of these, all except the subcommis-sural organ are fully developed in the adult human . The subcommissural organ, which is located on the ventral surface of the posterior commissure just caudal to the pineal gland, is a very prominent CVO in most verte-brates; although it generally regresses near the end of gestation in humans, vestigial remnants may be present. gular in cross section. A distinctive feature of the tracts frequently observed in adults is their remarkable content of corpora amylacea. brain stem in the cerebellopontine angle, and indicate the location ofthe lateral foramina of Luschka from which they protrude. The dusty discoloration ofthe inferior medulla is due to the presence of leptomenin-geal melanocytes. B:The ependyma-lined sleeve of the lateral recess of the fourth ventricle, together with the protruding tuft of choroid plexus, is referred to in the older literature as the "flower basket of Bochdalek" or "cornucopia." Pieces of the ependymal cuff are often seen adherent to the lateral aspect ofthe medulla in autopsy brain stem sections and should be recognized as a normal finding. ventricles, foramen of Monro, roof of the third ventricle, and fourth ventricle. The largest tufts are called the glomera choroidea and are located in the atria of the lateral ventricles. Choroid plexus consists of a botry-oid, finely tufted tangle of epithelium-covered fibrovascular tissue that is formed during embryonic devel-opmentthrough an invagination ofthe vascular pia-arachnoid into the ventricular system whereby it acquires its covering of modified ependyma. Two common incidental findings on MRI scans and in autopsy specimens are cystic change and xanthogranulomas, both of which may be bilateral. Histologically, choroid plexus is seen to be covered by simple cuboidal epithelium; in adults, each choroid epithelial cell bears a single prominent paranuclear cytoplasmic vacuole. An additional aging change seen in normal choroid plexus is calcification, which occurs in two forms: Nonspecific deposition of calcium salts in the col-lagenous stroma and as psammoma bodies. The latter arise from meningothelial cell nests that are nor-mally present in the choroid plexus as a result of the stroma's embryologic derivation from the pia-arachnoid meninges. INTRADURAL ELEMENTS OF THE PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM The major intradural representatives of the peripheral nervous system are the cranial and spinal nerves and small autonomic fibers in the adventitia of blood vessels. In all of the cranial nerves except cranial nerve eight, the tran-sition from central to peripheral nervous system occurs within 2 mm of the pial surface. In the eighth cranial nerve, the CNS extends out along the nerve for a centi-meter or so to the level of the internal auditory meatus. At this point, the transition occurs between the medial CNS segment and the lateral peripheral segment that evos share a midline or paramidline position, proximity to the ventricular system, and lack of the usual blood-brain barrier. The subcommissural organ is present in the developing fetus but is vestigial in the adult. SFO, subfornical organ; OVLT,organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis; ME, median eminence and infundibu-lum; seo, subcommissural organ; PG, pineal gland; AP, area postrema. a loose neuropil that is highly vascular and lacks a blood-brain barrier as illustrated by the subfornical organ. The subcommissural organ is located in the region of the pineal gland just beneath the posterior commis-sure in the posterior dorsal third ventricle and is highly developed in most mammalian species, as illustrated by the mouse. In humans, the subcommissural organ is vestigial but remnants are occasionally encountered.The organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis and the median eminence-infundibulum-neuro-hypophysis are two additional evos that are in contact with the third ventricle. Additional abbreviations: I, infundibulum; LT,lamina terminalis; oe, optic chiasm. c emerges from the apparatus for hearing and balance (Fig-ure 11.50). The myelin of the CNS is formed by oligoden-drocytes, whereas that of the peripheral nervous system is formed by Schwann cells. Peripheral nerve is noted for its content of interstitial collagen and the elongated nuclei of Schwann cells. Two additional intrathecal components of the periph-eral nervous system may pique interest on fortuitous encounter. The first is the so-called microneuroma, which is usually found in the parenchyma of the spinal tem myelin: For cranial nerve eight this transition occurs in the vicinity of the internal acoustic meatus.Third ventricle OVLT D cord or, more rarely, the medulla. These structures consist of a Gordian knot of unmyelinated axons that have been hypothesized to arise secondary to traumatic injury of peripheral nerve roots whose regener-ating axons follow penetrating spinal or medullary arter-ies into the CNS parenchyma along the Virchow-Robin spaces. According to the hypothesis, the tapering peri-vascular spaces ultimately block further advance of the regenerating axons and, thereby, result in the observed neuroma. •• axons are most often encountered in the spinal cord, less often in the medulla, as an incidental finding in an otherwise unremarkable specimen. minalis, is present in humans as a plexus of small peripheral nerve fascicles found in the subarachnoid space that covers the gyri recti that lie between the olfactory bulbs and tracts IA). Tissue sections taken through the gyri recti that include the overlying leptomeninges 18) will often include a terminal nerve fascicle cut in cross section Ie). The small peripheral nerve fascicles of cranial nerve zero are one potential source of subfrontal schwannomas. An additional component of the peripheral nervous sys-tem that occasionally arouses interest is the unmyelinated terminal nerve (variously termed nervus terminalis, cranial nerve zero, and cranial nerve T), which courses in the sub-arachnoid space covering the gyri recti of the orbital surface of the frontal lobes. Although usually com-posed of multiple small anastomosing fascicles, it occurs as a single trunk in some specimens and can be quite striking. Rarely, intrafascicular ganglion cells may be observed.