The external ear develops from the first branchial groove. The external auricle forms from the fusion of the auricular hillocks or tubercles, a group of mesenchymal tis-sue swellings from the first and second branchial arches, ology of the epithelia of the inner, middle, and external ears.estibule Vestibular nerve I I I Middle ear fNf1"IZ-~r.\)~~(}.J~ cavity window with stapesrynx that lie around the external portion of the first branchial groove. The external auditory canal is considered a normal remnant of the first branchial groove. The tym-panic membrane forms from the first and second branchial pouches and the first branchial groove. The ectoderm of the first branchial groove gives rise to the epithelium on the external side, the endoderm from the first branchial pouch gives rise to the epithelium on the internal side and the mesoderm of the first and second branchial pouches gives rise to the connective tissue lying between the external and internal epithelia. The middle ear space develops from invagination of the first branchial pouch from the primitive pharynx. The Eustachian tube and the tympanic cavity develop from the endoderm of the first branchial Development of the Epithelial Systems of the Ear / Vestibular labyrinth ~ Cochlear labyrinthOtocyst Ectoderm -----~Inner ear / Endoderm E t hi Branchial / ~ tu~~ ac Ian system ~ Ectoderm External -------~ ear canalMiddle ear pouch; the malleus and the stapes develop from the meso-derm of the first branchial arch while the incus develops from the mesoderm of the second bran-chial arch. The first division of the ear to develop is the inner ear which appears toward the end of the first month of gesta-tion. The membranous labyrinth, including the utricle, saccule, semicircular ducts, and cochlear duct arises from the otic vesicle. The otic vesicle forms from the invagination of the surface ectoderm, located on either side of the neural plate, into the mesenchyme. This invagination eventually loses its connection with the surface ectoderm. The bony labyrinth, including the vesti-bule, semicircular canals and cochlea arises from the mes-enchyme around the otic vesicle.