The transparent cornea occupies one-sixth of the ante-rior surface of the globe and refracts the entering light. Although individual variation is common, the cornea mea-sures approximately 11.7 mm in the horizontal plane and 10.6 mm in the vertical plane. Centrally, the cornea is about 0.5 mm thick, but peripherally it thickens to about 0.67 mm. Histologically, the cornea consists of six distinct layers:J ".Cornea Posterior Vitreous body Papi lla of optic nerve '\ Choroid from a rhesus monkey illustrates the major tissue layers of the eye, the lens, the vitreous body, and the spaces of the anterior and posterior chambers. (Reproduced from: Bloom W, Fawcett DW. A Textbook of His-tology. 12th ed. New York, NY: Chapman &Hall; 1994, with permission.) the epithelium, the basal lamina of the epithelium, Bowman's layer, the stroma,Descemet's mem-brane, and the endothelium. The corneal epithelium, which is composed of stratified nonkeratinized squamous cells, is about five cell layers thick centrally. The peripheral cornea is often twice as thick. The basilar epithelial cells are polygonal in shape, and as they become displaced to the corneal surface during differentia-tion, a more flattened appearance is acquired. In the nor-mal cornea, even the most superficial epithelial cells retain their nuclei. Mitotic figures are uncommon in the epithe-lium, but are observed in the basal cells occasionally. Some Langerhans' cells are present within the corneal epithelium, especially peripherally. Apoptosis is also uncommonly seen in the epithelium of the normal cornea. Langerhans' cells are most readily identified by special histochemical and immunohistochemical methods, and are not normally recognizable in routinely stained tissue sections. The corneal epithelium rests upon a basal lamina, which is difficult to see in hematoxylin and eosin stained tissue sections. Staining with the periodic acid-Schiff reaction makes this layer apparent. In certain overlies the basal lamina and Bowman's layer. The clefts within the col-lagenous stroma represent artifacts of tissue process-ing. No blood vessels or lymphatics are normally present within the cor-nea. Descemet's membrane and the corneal endothelium are located just posterior to the stroma. pathologic conditions, the epithelial basal lamina assumes an intraepitheliallocation. Bowman's layer is an acellular structure located just posterior to the epithelial basal lamina. It is approximately 8 to 14 urnthick. As shown by transmission electron microscopy, Bowman's layer is not a true basement membrane, but is composed of randomly oriented delicate collagen fibers. The anterior face of Bowman's layer ends distinctly at its junction with the epithelial basal lamina. Posteriorly, Bowman's layer merges inconspicuously with the underlying corneal stroma. Unmyelinated sensory nerves reach the epithelium from the stroma after crossing Bowman's layer. However, nerve processes are difficult to detect in the cornea in standard tissue sections, even with the use of special histologic techniques. The stroma accounts for approximately 90% of the cor-nea's thickness. It is composed of numerous layers of col-lagen fibers embedded in a proteoglycan-rich extracellular matrix, and the anterior and posterior portions of the cor-nea have several differences. The stroma contains keratan The corneal epithelium rests upon a thin basal lamina, which is prominent in this section following periodic acid-Schiff staining. The acellular band directly underneath the basal lamina is Bowman's layer. sulfate proteoglycans, as well as a galactosaminoglycan- rich proteoglycan. Transmission electron microscopy has disclosed that the corneal collagen fibers are regularly spaced and of a uni-form diameter; this arrangement contributes to the trans-parency of the cornea. Surrounded by the stromal collagen lamellae are the corneal fibroblasts. Other cell types are seldom identified in tissue sections of the normal corneal stroma, but rarely an occasional mononuclear leu-kocyte or granulocyte may be present. The normal cornea lacks blood vessels and its nutrition is obtained from an arterial plexus at the junction of the cornea and sclera, and from direct contact with the aqueous of the anterior cham-ber. In tissue sections of routinely processed formalin-fixed corneas, clefts are almost invariably present between the collagen lamellae. Initially interpreted as lymphatic chan-nels by early histologists, these clefts are artifacts of tissue processing. Lymphatic vessels are not present in the normal cornea. Descemet's membrane, a true basal lamina elaborated by the underlying corneal endothelial cells, begins to form during fetal life. At birth, it is approximately 3 to 4 urnthick. Basal laminar material is continuously added to the posterior part of Descemet's membrane throughout life so that by adulthood, this structure attains a thickness of approximately 10 to 12 urn. The fetal and postnatal regions of Descemet's membrane differ ultrastructurally. This dif-ference is occasionally discernible by light microscopy. The corneal endothelium is directly exposed to the aqueous in the anterior chamber. Although this cell layer does not line blood vessels or lymphatic spaces, the term "endothelium" is firmly entrenched in the litera-ture. These cells function as an osmotic pump to regulate a necessary state of stromal dehydration which preserves cor-neal clarity. Endothelial decompensation results in corneal edema and diminished optical transparency. The corneal endothelium has been shown by immunohistochemistry to adjacent to Descemefs membrane. These cells are in direct contact with the aqueous of the anterior chamber. be S-100 protein positive, a finding supportive of other evi-dence suggesting a neural crest origin. They react with the monoclonal antibody 2B4.14.1, which recognizes the renal Tamm-Horsfall glycoprotein antigen, raising the possibility that the cornea expresses a molecule with homeostatic properties similar to that ascribed to THGP. The endothelial cells of the cornea normally form a sin-gle flattened layer and, virtually, never regenerate by mito-sis in human eyes. Under pathologic conditions (epithelial ingrowth and posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy) cytokeratin-containing squamous cells replace the endothe-lium and form a layer that is more than one-cell thick. After the second decade of life, age-related focal excres-cences commonly form on the peripheral part of Descemet's membrane. Vir-tually identical focal thickenings occur on the central part of Descemet's membrane under pathologic diately posterior to the corneal stroma. The excrescences on the peripheral portion of Descemefs membrane represent an aging change. Descemefs membrane also thickens with age.circumstances, and most notably in Fuchs' corneal dystro-phy. The presence of excrescences on Descemet's mem-brane in tissue sections of corneal buttons removed at pen-etrating keratoplasty is always abnormal. Hassall-Henle warts are too peripheral in location to be present in a surgically excised corneal button. Corneal epithelium and endothelium are prone to being artifactitiously "rubbed-off" during prosection of the tissue, and it is important to distinguish this artifact from the true loss of corneal epithelium and endothelium.