Regardless of the etiology, joint injury is characterized by certain basic cellular and tissue responses. There is usually macroscopic and microscopic evi-dence of both degeneration and repair in both the cells and in the extracellular matrix. [In the extracel-lular matrix, the changes may result from direct physi-cal injury, from alteration in the cellular synthesis of the matrix, or from enzymatic breakdown of the matrix constituents. These changes are probably most apparent in the surface cartilage.] In the vascularized tissues, injury from whatever cause is followed by an acute and then by a chronic inflammatory response of a greater or lesser degree. As a result, the necrotic injured tissue is removed and replaced by proliferative vascular tissue (granulation tissue). The inflammatory response results in "repair" of injured tissue by fibrous scar. Independently of scarring, a second mode of repair involves regen-eration of tissue similar to that which originally was injured. In nonvascularized tissue, such as cartilage, an inflammatory response and subsequent scarring cannot occur, but this does not preclude tissue regen-eration that does occur. (Note that cartilage injury always eventually invokes an inflammatory response in the joint since some vascularized tissues, ie, bone or synovium are inevitably involved.) Cartilage Macroscopic evidence of injury to cartilage is evident only in the extracellular matrix, mainly the collage-nous component, and one of the earliest findings is a disrup-tion of the collagen fibers at the surface, which, instead of being smooth, becomes rough and/or eroded. The local stresses and strains in the collagen fibrils, which cause the damage, cannot dependably be determined without taking the local arcade-like collagen-fibril structure into account. Three patterns of macroscopic alteration involving the cartilage surface and, to a variable degree, the underlying cartilage tissue can be identified: Fibrillation (generally age related), erosion, and cracking (both of which are probably trauma related). The term fibrillation is used to describe replacement of the normally smooth, shiny surface by a surface similar to cut velvet. This type of transformation can be observed perifoveal region. The fibrillated cartilage has been highlighted by India ink. B.In a close-up photograph, pin splits in the cartilage seem to follow the orientation of the collagen fibers in the fibrillated area. both on very thick cartilage, such as the patella, and on very thin cartilage, such as that found in the interphalan-geal joints. The "pile" of the fibrillated area may be short or shaggy. The junction between the fibrillated area and the adjacent normal appearing cartilage is morphologically usually well defined and generally distinct. A recent study has concluded that both microscopic mag-netic resonance imaging and polarized light microscopy can detect quantitative changes in collagen fiber architecture in early osteoarthritis and also resolve topographical variation in cartilage microstructure of canine tibial plateau. (In this regard, continuing collaborative studies of morphology, including imaging studies, biochemistry, and biomechanics, are urgently needed.) For the morphologist, there appear to be two patterns of fibrillation. Well-defined areas of fibrillation affecting par-ticular locations in certain joints are present in everyone from an early age. It is suggested by this author that these areas may be related to underloading of the cartilage. In established cases of osteoarthritis, there are areas of fibrillation that appear in different areas of the joint than those previously mentioned and that appear to be secondary to mechanical abrasion of the cartilage surface. The micro-scopic characterization of these two distinct types of fibril-lation is incomplete, but perhaps the latter is distinguished by deeper clefts and a greater tendency for the chondro-cytes to form proliferating clones.Cartilage ulceration, or solution of the surface, is charac-teristic of progressive degenerative changes in the joint. The base of the erosion appears initially to be either contoured or smooth. Tissue damage may eventually be so extensive as to completely denude the joint surface of its covering cartilage layer. The last form of structural lesion in this group, which is distinctly less common than either fibrillation or ulceration, is deep cracking of the cartilage. These cracks extend verti-cally deep into the cartilage and microscopically often have a deep horizontal component. Perhaps these result from severe impact loading. In considering the pathogenesis of these three histo-logic types of cartilage matrix damage in the early stages of osteoarthritis, it is important to recognize that they may affect the opposed articular surfaces in different areas and to different degrees. This is in marked contrast to eburnation, in which both of the opposed surfaces are affected. It therefore appears that in many cases fibril-lation and other cartilage alteration cannot be ascribed simply to abrasion. An increase in the ratio of water to PG in the cartilage matrix leads to softening of the cartilage, and this may be evidence of insufficient loading of the joint. Chondromalacia and fibrillation usually occur together, but chondromalacia may be present before there is any obvious gross evidence of fibrillation. cartilage matrix. The lesion shown is characteristic of a blisterlike lesion, which is seen in many cases of chondromalacia patellae IH&E stain, x4objective). Injury at a cellular level is recognizable only microscopi-cally. Necrosis can be identified when only the ghost out-lines of the chondrocytes remain. This ghosting, usually scattered but focal in distribution, is a common finding in arthritis. Less often, all of the chondrocytes are seen to be necrotic. Just as the effect of injury to the articular cartilage is reflected by the histologic response of both matrix and cells, so too is the subsequent reparative cartilage regenera-tion. Within the preexisting cartilage matrix, there is focal cell proliferation with clumps, or clones, of chondrocytes. When the tissue is stained with toluidine blue, there is often intense metachromasia of the matrix around these clumps of proliferating chondrocytes, evidence of increased PC synthesis. This process can be thought of as "intrinsic" repair.In a damaged joint, cartilage repair may also be initiated from either or both of the following possible sites: the joint margin or the subchondral bone. Extrinsic repair of carti-lage, which develops from the joint margin, can be seen as a cellular layer of cartilage extending over, and sometimes dissecting into, the existing cartilage. This extrinsically repaired cartilage is usually much more cellular than the preexisting articular cartilage, and the chondrocytes are evenly distributed throughout the matrix. On microscopic examination this type of repair carti-lage can easily be overlooked. However, examination under polarized light will clearly demonstrate the discontinuity between the collagen network of the repair cartilage and that of the preexisting cartilage, as well as the denser thicker collagen fibers of the repair cartilage. In osteoarthritic joints, in which loss of the articular car-tilage has denuded the underlying bone, there are frequently pits in the bone surface from which protrude small nodules of firm white tissue. On microscopic examination, these nodules have the appearance of fibrocartilage arising in the marrow spaces of the subchondral bone. They may extend over the previously denuded surface to form a more or less continuous layer of repair tissue. Most specimens obtained from cases of osteoarthritis reveal both intrinsic and extrinsic repair of cartilage. Bone Arthritis affects not only the articular cartilage, but also the underlying bone and the structures around the joint. As the articular cartilage is eroded from the surface, the underly-ing bone is subjected to increasingly localized overloading. In sub articular bone that has been denuded, there is pro-liferation of osteoblasts and formation of new bone, which occurs both on the surfaces of existing intact trabeculae and around microfractures. In x-rays of arthritis, focal areas of necrosis are common. Rarely, the necrosis is extensive. In inflam-matory arthritis, chondrocyte necrosis is also common and often associated with an irregular lysis of the matrix around the necrotic cells, the so-called Weichselbaum's lacunae IH&E stain, xl0objective). B.Photo-micrograph to demonstrate focal calcification around necrotic chondrocytes in the deep zone of the cartilage IH&E stain, x25objective). around the clones, which correspond to increased proteoglycan synthesis by the cells (H&E stain, xl0 objec-tive). B.When examined by polarized light, the proliferating clones are visibly displacing the existing collagen matrix. arthritic joints, this new bone appears as increased density or sclerosis. A further result of increased local stress is that the bone at the articulating surface is likely to undergo focal pressure necrosis. This superficial necrosis is different both in its etiology and pathogenesis from that associated with "primary" subchondral infarction, which itself leads to secondary osteoarthritis. However, in clini-cal practice, differentiation between primary and secondary bone and bone marrow necrosis may be difficult, especially in the late stages of primary subchondral infarction. Subarticular cysts are usually seen only where the over-lying cartilage is absent. Such cysts are common in cases ofosteoarthritis and are believed to result from transmission of intra-articular pressure through defects in the articulat-ing bony surface into the marrow spaces of the subchon-dral bone. The cysts increase in size until the pressure within them is equal to the intra-articular pressure. Cysts may also occur because of focal tissue necrosis. In cases of arthritis due to rheumatoid disease or gout, peri-articular radiologic "cysts" may be associated with erosion of the marginal subchondral bone by the diseased synovium or tophaceous deposits of uric acid crystals. Separated fragments of bone and cartilage from a damaged joint surface may become incorporated into the the articular surface of an arthritic joint demonstrates extrinsic repar-ative fibrocartilage, which extends to the tidemark of the original articular hyaline cartilage (H&E stain, xlOobjective). B.The same field photographed with polarized light shows the discontinuity of the collagen between the calcified zone and the reparative cartilage. ing reparative cartilage extending over preexisting damaged cartilage (H&E stain, x4objective). B.Same field photo-graphed with polarized light. synovial membrane and digested, or they may remain free as loose bodies in the joint cavity. Under certain circum-stances, proliferation of cartilage cells occurs at the surface of these loose bodies and consequently they grow larger. As they grow, their centers become necrotic and calcified. In histologic sections it is possible to visu-alize periodic extension of this central calcification in the form of concentric rings, which increase in number as the loose body grows. Sometimes the loose bodies reattach to the synovial membrane at a later stage, in which case they bone in a case of osteoarthritis. There is a very prominent layer of osteo-blasts covering the sclerotic bone that underlies the area denuded of cartilage.are invaded by blood vessels; endochondral ossification then occurs, and the loose bodies again develop a viable bony core. There is some degree of loose body formation in many cases of arthritis, but they are especially prominent in neu-ropathic joints and in other types of rapidly destructive osteoarthritis. Occasionally, in cases of osteo-arthritis, the loose bodies are so numerous that they must be distinguished from those that occur in primary synovial chondromatosis. a large wedge-shaped area of necrosis of the superior portion of the head. B power photograph of a cross section of a loose body showing concentric growth rings. C.Photomicrograph showing crowded proliferating chondrocytes and a growth ring. D. Photomicrograph to show benign proliferating chondrocytes. Ligaments Microscopic evidence both of lacerations and repair by scar tissue is common in the ligamentous and capsular tissue around an arthritic joint. These changes are readily recog-nized by the use of polarized microscopy, where the altera-tions in the organization of the collagen are made very clear. Whether these lacerations preceded the arthritic process or they are its consequence cannot usually be determined by microscopic examination. Synovial Membrane Injury and breakdown of cartilage and bone result in increased amounts of breakdown product and particulate debris within the joint cavity. This is removed from the syno-vial fluid by phagocytic cells of the syno-vial membrane. In consequence, the membrane becomes both hypertrophic and hyperplastic: frequently the break-down products of the cartilage and bone matrix evoke an inflammatory response. For this reason, some degree of chronic inflammation can be expected in the syno-vial membrane of arthritic joints, even when the injury has been purely a mechanical one. Inflammation is especiallyprominent where there has been rapid breakdown of the articular components as evidenced by the presence in the synovium of bone and cartilage detritus. Histologic studies have shown that there may be a simi-larity between the degree of inflammatory response as seen in some cases of severe osteoarthritis and that of rheuma-toid arthritis. However, in osteoarthritis the synovial inflammation is likely to be the result of cartilage break-down, whereas in rheumatoid arthritis the synovial inflam-mation is the cause of cartilage breakdown. Extension of hyperplastic synovium onto the articu-lar surface of the joint is a common finding even in osteoarthritis, particularly in the hip. However, the extent and aggressiveness of this pannus with respect to underlying cartilage destruction is much less marked in osteoarthritis than in rheumatoid arthritis. Since, under normal conditions, the synovial membrane is responsible for the nutrition of articular cartilage, it might be expected that the chronically inflamed and scarred syno-vial membrane of an arthritic joint would function less effec-tively than that of a normal joint: Disturbance in synovial nutrient function, as well as increased enzymatic activity, may very well contribute to the chronicity of the arthritic process. The hypertrophied and hyperplastic synovium associated with arthritis is also likely to be traumatized as it extends into the joint cavity Evidence of bleeding into the joint, of a patient with a moderate degree of osteoarthritis reveals not only a hypertrophy of the synovial lining cells, but also hyperplasia that has resulted in a piling up of the synoviocytes. In the subsynovial tissue, there is increased vascularity and a mild chronic inflammatory infiltrate. A. A magnetic resonance image of a knee shows rupture of the patellar ligament. B.Photomicrograph to demonstrate an area in a ligament where a laceration has occurred. The well-oriented colla-gen of the lacerated ligament is clearly demarcated from the resultant defect, which can be seen to have been filled with a vascularized cel-lular fibrous scar tissue. C.Same field photo-graphed with polarized light. with subsequent hemosiderin staining of the synovial mem-brane, is a common histologic finding and may occasionally be marked. When this is the case, and despite their similar color, the orange-brown staining of the fine villous synovium seen at operation should not be confused with the swollen papillary synovium of pigmented villonodular synovitis. Synovial Fluid Examination of synovial fluid is extremely helpful in the diagnosis of arthritis, both for determining the cause and femoral head in a case of osteoarthritis. A fibrous pannus extends over the articular surface. chronicity of the disease. Whatever the cause of arthritis, the synovial fluid is altered. Normal synovial fluid, a dialysate of plasma to which hyaluronic acid produced by the Type B cells of the synovial lining is added, is viscous, pale yellow, and clear. Even in large joints the volume is small. Incases of inflammatory arthritis, there is an increased volume of synovial fluid with a high count of inflammatory cells. The amount of hyaluronic acid is markedly dimin-ished, leading to a typical decrease in viscosity. On the other hand, in degenerate forms of arthritis the amount of hyal-uronic acid is increased, resulting in an extremely viscous fluid. There is also an increase in volume, although not to the same degree as that which is seen in the inflammatory arthritides.