It was first noted early in the twentieth century that the nail unit was comparable in several respects to a hair follicle sectioned longitudinally and laid on its side. Vari-ous types of differently keratinizing epidermis make up the nail. What commonly is termed "the nail plate" is the horny end product of the most important epithelial component, Sagittal section of an adultthumb, in which it is possible to observe the relations of the nail unit with the adjacent tissues. the matrix. Usually, this nail plate is slightly convex or flat, rectangular, and of varying size between approximately 1 x1 and 2 x3ern,depending on the finger. In the hand, this is usually 25 to 50% of the dorsal surface of the fingertips, whereas in the big toe it occupies about 75%. The nail is translucent and becomes rosy from the underly-ing vascular network. However, change of colors (erythro-nychia, melanonychia) can be observed in the nail plate and may indicate inflammatory diseases (lichen planus, lupus eritematosus); benign or malignant neoplasm, mainly sub-ungual melanoma; and scarring of the dermis. The white appearance of nails in leukonychia seems to be due to an abnormal keratinization of cells originating from the proxi-mal nail matrix, leading to the presence of abun-dant intracellular vacuoles and to a lesser compactness of keratins. Gene mapping within this chromosomal region includes gene coding for type II cytokeratins and bed, and the lateral border is overlapped by lateral nail fold. hard keratins, and the gene defect resides on chromosome 12q13. In the proximal portion, there is an arch called lunula. The thickness of the nail plate is 0.5 mm in women and 0.6 mm in men. The nail plate is delimited by three folds: Two lateral and one proximal. If the nail plate is avulsed, the grooves become visible where the nail plate rested. These potential spaces are only real spaces in abnormal conditions of the nail, as in paronychia. In the lat-~ / /Proximal nail fold Cuticle Hyponychium / Lateral nail fold the formation of the nail plate, except in the most proximal portions where it becomes continuous with the epidermis of the proximal groove or matrix. The proximal nail fold is the most important one, since, as we shall note later, its contribution to the forma-tion of the nail plate is fundamental. This fold shows two portions: A dorsal portion, lodging the matrix, and a ventral portion. Twenty-five percent of the total surface of the nail plate is located under the ventral portion of the proximal nail fold. Terminal tendon of the digital extensor is closely related with this area and the thin nature and proximity with the nail matrix must be kept in mind during surgery. A white crescent-shaped lunula can project from under the proximal nail fold. It is usual on the thumbs and com-mon on other fingers and on large toenails. The lunula is the most distal portion of the matrix and determines the shape of the free edge of the nail plate. The color of the lunula is partly due to the effect of light scattered by the nucleated cells of the keratogenous zone of the matrix and partly to the thicker layer of epithelial cells making up the matrix. At the point of separation of the nail plate and the nail bed, the subungual epidermis may be modified as the sole horn. In humans, this structure may only be vestigial: Its original significance only being evident from compara-tive anatomical studies. However, in certain diseases, it could be the seat of distal subungual hyperkeratosis or parakeratosis, for example, in pachyonychia congenita and pityriasis rubra pilaris. The distal limit of the ungual layer is the hyponychium, determining the formation of the distal fold, a keratinized structure that continues until the fingertips. A subungual extension of the hyponychium and obliteration of the distal groove is named pterygium inver-sum unguis. This term was coined because of the simi-larity between the behavior of the hyponychium and the eponychium in classic cases of pterygium unguis. On close examination, two further distal zones can often be identified: The distal yellow-white margin and, immedi-ately proximal to this, the onychodermal band. This band is a barely perceptible narrow transverse band, 0.5 to 1.5 mm wide, that is more prominent in acrocyanosis. The exact anatomical basis for the onychodermal band is not known, but it appears to have a different blood supply from the main body of the nail bed. It is possible to explore it through a strong compression of the distal zone of the finger, leaving behind a white band. The band's color can occasionally be modified by diseases. Several studies have been published about the explora-tion of the nail apparatus. Although ultrasound transmis-sion can be useful for studying the nail plate thickness, magnetic resonance imaging permits the detection of subungual lesions smaller than 1 mm in diameter. Specific causes of injury include homicide, abuse, neglect, assault, self-inflicted injury, suicide, torture, poisoning, and bioterrorism have been studied in nails. show a polyhedral disposition, with rounded corners; the cells do not contain nuclei or elements jVVG stain).