An understanding of the anatomy of peripheral nerves is essential for the interpretation of clinical signs and symp-toms and for planning an autopsy to investigate a patient with a peripheral neuropathy. Major nerves, such as the sciatic and median nerves, con-tain motor, sensory, and autonomic nerve fibers; they are thus compound nerve trunks. It was Sir Charles Bell, the Scottish physician, who first demonstrated that motor function lay in the anterior roots; Francois Magendie, the French physiolo-gist, showed that the sensory function lay in the posterior roots. This is known as the Bell-Magendie law. Motor nerves are derived from anterior horn cells in the spinal cord or from defined nuclei in the brain stem. The initial segment of the axon lies within the central nervous system and is ensheathed by myelin formed by oligodendrocytes. As the axons pass out of the brain stem or spinal cord, they become myelinated by Schwann cells. Anterior spinal roots join the posterior roots as they pass through the intervertebral foramina to form periph-eral nerve trunks. Cranial nerves leave the skull through a number of different foramina. The junction point between oli-godendrocytes and the Schwann sheath of the cranial nerves, known as Obersteiner-Redlich zone, has some clini-cal significance. For example, the pulsatile compression of the O-Rz by a vessel in some exit foramina may be respon-sible for the clinical symptoms of trigeminal and glossopha-ryngeal neuralgia, hemifacial spasm, torticollis spasmodicus or even symptoms of essential hypertension when a vascular cross compression of the left vagus nerve occurs. Motor nerves end peripherally at muscle end-plates and many of the sensory nerves are associated with peripheral sensory endings. The cell bodies of sensory nerves lie out-side the central nervous system in the dorsal root ganglia or in the cranial nerve ganglia. Each ganglion contains numerous, almost spherical neurons with their surrounding satellite cells. Such satellite cells are derived from the neural crest and have an origin similar to that of Schwann cells. Satellite cells have been referred to in the past by a large variety of names such as amphicyte, capsular cells, perisomatic gliocyte, or perineuronal satellite Schwann cells. Dorsal root ganglion cells were first described by the Swiss anatomist von Kolliker in 1844. They are examples of pseudounipolar cells, which means that a single, highly coiled axon, or stem process, arises from each perikaryon but, at varying distances from the neuron, there is a T- or Y-shaped bifurcation, always at a node of Ranvier, with the formation of central and peripheral axons. Thus, the initial segment of axon gives the impression that the cell is a uni-,IIJI\.'iUrlllnl , ".polar neuron but it actually has two axons. The central axon passes into the spinal cord either to syn-apse in the posterior sensory horn of gray matter or to pass directly into the dorsal columns. Peripheral axons pass into the peripheral nerves. Autonomic nerves are either parasympathetic or sym-pathetic. Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers pass out of the brain stem in the III, VII, IX, and X cranial nerves and from the sacral cord in the second and third sacral nerves. Postganglionic neurons are situated near or within the struc-tures being innervated. Sympathetic preganglionic fibers arise from neurons in the intermediolateral cell columns of gray matter in the thoracic spinal cord and pass out in thoracic anterior roots. These preganglionic fibers are myelinated and reach the sympathetic trunk through the corresponding anterior spinal roots and synapse with the sympathetic ganglion cells in paravertebral or prevertebral locations. The autonomic nervous system innervates viscera, blood vessels, and smooth muscle of the eye and skin. HISTOLOGY, IMMUNOCYTOCHEMISTRY, AND ULTRASTRUCTURE OF PERIPHERAL NERVES Components of the Nerve Sheath Macroscopic inspection of a normal peripheral nerve reveals glistening white bundles of fascicles bound together by con-nective tissue. The intraneural arrangement of fascicles is variable and changes continuously throughout the length of every nerve. Damaged peripheral nerves are often gray and shrunken due to the loss of myelin. Microscopically, trans-verse sections of a peripheral nerve show how a normal sural nerve. The nerve fascicles with roughly circular outlines are surrounded by perineurium and embedded in the connective tissue ofthe epineurium. Epineurial blood vessels are also cut in cross section and there is adherent adipose tissue. The 111m sections are stained with hematoxylin and eosin. B. The endoneurial compartment containing myelinated and non-myelinated nerve fibers and their accompanying Schwann cells is surrounded by perineurium. Paraffin section stained with hematoxylin and eosin. endoneurial compartments containing axons and Schwann cells are surrounded by perineurium to form individual fas-cicles embedded in epineurial fibrous tissue. Epineurium The epineurium consists of moderately dense connective tissue binding nerve fascicles together. Itmerges with the adipose tissue that surrounds peripheral nerves A), particularly in the subcutaneous tissue. In addition to fibroblasts, the epineurium contains mast cells. Although mostly composed of collagen, there are elastic fibers in the epineurium so that when a specimen of unfixed nerve is removed from the body there is some elastic recoil of the epineurium. The amount of epineurial tissue varies and is more abundant in nerves adjacent to joints. As nerve branches become smaller to consist of only one fascicle, epineurium is no longer present. In nerves that consist of several fascicles, one or more arteries, veins, and lymphat-ics run longitudinally in the epineurium parallel to the nerve fascicles. Inflamma-tion and occlusion of such arteries is an important cause of nerve damage in vasculitic diseases. The overgrowth of epineurial adipose tissue produces the so-called lipofibro-matous hamartoma, which classically affects the hands and is associated with enlargement of the affected digit. Perineurium Originally described by F.G.J. Henle in the 19th century, the perineurium has, in the past, been known by a variety of different terms such as mesothelium, perilemma, neu-rothelium, perineurothelium and perineurial epithelium. On the basis of the pioneer work of the 1995 Nobel Prize winners C. Nusslein-Volhard and Wieschaus, an intercellular signaling molecule secreted by Schwarm cells known as Desert Hedgehog, was described, that functions as an important molecule in the formation of the perineu-rium. Apparently this molecule signals to the surround-ing connective tissue cells to organize the perineurium. The perineurium consists of concentric layers of flat-tened cells separated by layers of collagen -10.4). The number of cell layers varies from nerve to nerve and depends on the size of the nerve fascicle. In the sural nerve, for example, there are 8 to 12 layers of perineurial cells but the number of layers decreases progressively so that a single layer of perineurial cells surrounds fine distal nerve branches. Perineurial cells eventually fuse to form the outer-core of the terminal sensory endings in pacinian corpuscles and muscle spindles. In motor nerves, the perineurial cells form an open funnel as the nerve ends at the motor end-plate. Paraganglia of the vagus nerve may lie just underneath the perineurium. By electron microscopy, perineurial cells are seen as thin sheets of cytoplasm containing small amounts of endo-plasmic reticulum, filaments, and numerous pinocytotic vesicles that open on to the external and internal surfaces of Diagram to show the major elements of peripheral nerve compartments. The epineurium IEP) contains collagen, blood vessels, and some adherent adipose tissues. The flattened cells of the peri-neurium are joined by tight junctions and form flattened layers separated by collagen fibers. Renaut bodies IR) project into the endo-neurium. Schwann cells forming lamellated myelin 1M) (drawn uncompacted in this diagram) surround the larger axons. Multiple unmyelinated axons IUM) are invaginated into the surface of Schwann cells. Other elements include fibroblasts [Fb). mast cells IMc), capillar-ies, and collagen. the cell. Basement membrane is usually seen on both sides of each perineurial lamina. Numerous cell junc-tions, including well-formed tight junctions (zonulae occlu-dentes), are present between adjacent perineurial cells and appear to be critical for the formation of the blood-nerve barrier. Claudins are integral membrane proteins that playa major role in tight junctions and are present in normal and neoplastic perineurium. Claudins comprise a group of approximately 20 different proteins that are exclu-sively localized in tight junctions. In peripheral nerves, Claudin-1 expression is largely limited to perineu-rial cells but is also present in paranodal regions and in the outer mesaxon along internodes. When tracer substances such as ferritin and horseradish peroxidase are injected into the blood, they do not enter peripheral nerves. Their entry is prevented by tight junctions in endoneurial capillaries and by the tight junctions in the inner layers of the perineurium. Thus, there is a blood-nerve barrier analo-gous to the blood-brain barrier. The blood-nerve barrier is present soon after birth and may prevent the entry of drugs and other substances into nerves that may other-wise interfere or block nerve conduction. No such blood-nerve barrier exists in the dorsal root ganglia or in autonomic ganglia; these sites in the peripheral nervous sys-tem are vulnerable to certain toxins such as mercury. verse section. Perineurium surrounds the endoneurium containing myelinated nerve fibers. The nuclei are mainly those of Schwann cells. Paraffin section stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Band C.Similar field to stained for EMA and Glut-l respectively. The perineurium is densely stained. Immunoperoxidase technique with anti-EMA antibody and anti-Glut-l antibody. D.Part of a nerve fascicle stained for neurofilament protein. Large myelinated axons are well stained but unmyelinated axons are much smaller and more difficult to detect. Immunoperoxidase technique using an antibody against the 80 kDa neurofila-ment protein. E.Part of a nerve fascicle stained for S-100 protein showing densely stained Schwann cells. Immunoperoxidase using anti-S-l00 protein antibody. F and G. If the perineurium is injured, there is breakdown of the blood-nerve barrier and perineurial cells migrate into the endoneurium to surround small fascicles of nerve fibers. This is classically seen in amputation neuromas but is also observed in focal compressive lesions of nerve. The swelling of the nerve and the concentric arrange-ment of the perineurial cells in the compressive lesions spawned the term "localized hypertrophic neuropathy" but it is quite different from hypertrophic neuropathy, in which Schwann cells form whorls around individual axons in response to recurrent segmental demyelination (see below). Whereas the epineurial sheath of the nerve is continu-ous with the dura mater at the junction of spinal nerves and spinal nerve roots, the perineurium blends with the pia-arachnoid. There are some morphological similarities between the perineurium and arachnoid cells, although arachnoid cells are not usually coated by the base-ment membrane. Immunocytochemically, perineurial cells and pia-arachnoid cells are positive for epithelial membrane antigen and vimentin but are nega-tive for S-100 protein and CD57. Perineurial Part of a nerve fascicle stained for E-cadherin and CD57 respectively, showing stained Schwann cells. Immunoperoxidase using anti-E-cadherin and anti-CD57 antibod-ies. H.Part of a nerve showing few endoneurial and numerous epineurial CD-34-positive cells. These cells are clearly distinct from Schwann cells that comprise the bulk of the cell in the nerve. Immu-noperoxidase ABC using anti-CD34 antibody. I.Part of a nerve showing collagen IV staining the basement membrane of the perineurial cells. Immunoperoxidase using anti-collagen IV anti-body. cells also express insulin-dependent glucose transporter protein I and Claudin-l. Immunohistochemistry has demonstrated that perineurial cells proliferate in some conditions such as traumatic neu-roma, Morton's neuroma, neurofibroma, solitary circum-scribed neuroma, Pacinian neuroma, and in the mucosal neuromas associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia. Some tumor cells break through the perineurial sheath to grow along the perineurial space; perineurial invasion has been correlated with decreased survival times in some can-cers. The problem for the histopathologist, however, is that sometimes perineurial invasion cannot be unequivo-cally determined on H&E stained sections. Immunocyto-chemistry for Glut-I, EMA and Claudin-I may be used to rapidly and accurately assess the presence of perineurial invasion. Care must be taken however when exam-ining cases of vasitis nodosa, in which benign proliferating ductules may be found within the perineurium and endo-neurium. Nerve involvement has also been reported in fibrocystic disease of the breast, normal and hyperplastic prostate and normal pancreas. myelinated fibers are seen. In a normal nerve, myelinated fibers are separated from each other but in this nerve there are also small numbers of regenerating clusters. The 1 urnresin section is stained with toluidine blue. B.Part of a sural nerve fascicle cut in transverse section. Perineurium is at the top right. Both large and small myelinated fibers vary in cross-sectional outline. Splits within the sheath are Schmidt-Lanterman incisures. Endoneurial blood vessel. Section through a fiber near the node of Ranvier. Unmyelinated axons are seen as unstained circles within Schwann cells. The 1 urn resin section. Endoneurium The endoneurium is the compartment that contains axons and their surrounding Schwann cells, collagen fibers, fibro-blasts, capillaries, and a few mast cells. In cross sections of peripheral nerves, some 90% of the nuclei belong to Schwann cells, 5% to fibroblasts, and 5% to other cells (such as mast cells and capillary endothelial cells). Within the endoneurium CD34-positive bipolar cells with delicate dendritic processes have been identified and are distinct from Schwann cells. Simi-lar cells have been identified in peripheral nerve sheath tumors in various proportions. Some investigators have observed endoneurial dendritic cells, distinct from Schwann cells and conventional fibroblasts, which may function as phagocytes under certain conditions. In this regard, an intrinsic population of immunocom-petent and potentially phagocytic cells (endoneurial macro-phages) has been described within the human endoneurium that shares several lineage-related and functional markers with macrophages and may represent the peripheral counterpart of del Rio-Hortega cells of the CNS. Nerve fibers may be myelinated or unmyelinated but not all nerves have the same nerve fiber composition. Most biop-sies of peripheral nerves in humans are taken from the sural nerve at the ankle and it is the composition of this nerve that has been most closely studied. Fibroblasts are ultrastruc-turally identical to fibroblasts elsewhere in the body. Mast cells are a normal constituent of the endoneurium and are also seen in sensory ganglia and in the epineurial sheath of peripheral nerves. There is an increase in the number of mast cells in some pathological conditions such as axonal (walle-rian) degeneration and in some neoplastic entities such as neurofibromatosis. A characteristically high number of mast cells is seen in neurofibromas but they are only present in the Antoni B areas of schwannomas. Mast cells arethought to influence growth of neurofibromas, because some of their mediators may also act as growth factors. Appar-ently the inciting factor for mast cell migration into nerve sheath tumors is Kit ligand that is hypersecreteted by NF-/-Schwann cell populations. Mast cell stabilizers are claimed to reduce proliferation and itching of neurofibromas. Following nerve injury, there is breakdown of the blood-nerve barrier as endoneurial vessels become permeable to fluid and protein; this increase in permeability may be related to the release of biogenic amines from mast cells within the endoneurium. Proteases released from mast cells have a high myelinolytic activity and may playa role in the breakdown of myelin in certain demyelinating diseases. Collagen within the endoneurial compartment is highly organized and forms two distinct sheaths around myelinated and unmyelinated nerve fibers and their Schwann cells (Fig-ures 10.8 and 10.10). The outer endoneurial sheath (of Key and Retzius) is composed of longitudinally oriented large diameter collagen fibers; the inner endoneurial sheath (of Plenk and Laidlaw) is composed of fine collagen fibers ori-ented obliquely or circumferentially to the nerve fibers. The term neurilemma has been applied to the combined sheath formed by the basement membrane of the Schwann cell and the adjacent inner endoneurial sheath. Thus the term neurilemmoma is inappropriate when used to describe tumors of Schwann cell origin. The longi-tudinal orientation of collagen fibers in the outer endoneu-rial sheath, together with the Schwann cell basement mem-brane tubes, may play an important role in guiding axons as they regenerate following peripheral nerve damage. Renaut bodies are seen not infrequently in the endoneurium of human peripheral nerves. Described in the 19th century by the French physi-cianJ.L.Renaut, they are cylindrical (circular in cross sec-tion), hyaline structures attached to the inner aspect of the showing the Renaut corpuscles in blue. Classical perineurial markers such as EMA, Caludin-l and Glut-l are expressed in Renaut boides.ln addition HIF-la, a transcription factor that regulates Glut-l is also expressed in Renaut boides and the perineurium. Expression of NF-2 is also detected in Renaut bodies and scattered perineruial cells. In contrast, NF-l is negative in RB. perineurium. Composed of randomly oriented collagen fibers, spidery fibroblasts and perineurial cells, Renaut bodies stain positively with Alcian blue due to the presence of acid glycosaminoglycans. The rest of the endoneurium also con-tains Alcian blue positive mucoproteins. Renaut bodies produce extracellular matrix highly enriched in elastic fiber components and express vimentin, collagen IV,EMA, Glut-1 and Claudin-1; interestingly the adjacent perineruium shows identical pattern of immunoreactivity. In longitudinal section, they may extend for some distance along the nerve and end in a blunt and abrupt fashion. These bodies are more prominent in horses and donkeys than in humans. Their precise function is not known, but Renaut himself thought that they may act as protective cushions within the nerve. They increase in number in compressive neuropathies and in a number of other neuropathies including hypothyroid neuropathy and may be a reaction to trauma. Blood Supply of Peripheral Nerves Vasa nervorum supplying peripheral nerves are derived from a series of branches from associated regional arter-ies. Branches from those arteries enter the epineurium to form an intercommunicating or anastomosing plexus. From that plexus, vessels penetrate the perineurium obliquely and enter the endoneurium as capillaries often surrounded by pericytes. Tight junctions between the endothelial cells of the endo-neurial capillaries constitute the blood-nerve barrier. Complete infarction of peripheral nerves is very uncom-mon, probably due to the rich anastomotic connections ofepineurial arteries. However, inflammation and thrombotic occlusion of epineurial arteries is seen in vasculitides and occlusion by emboli occurs in patients with atheroscle-rotic peripheral vascular disease; both these disorders result in ischemic damage to peripheral nerves with axonal degen-eration and consequent peripheral neuropathy. Nerve Fibers Most peripheral nerves contain a mixture of myelinated and unmyelinated nerve fibers. As the axons are oriented longitudinally along the nerve, quantitative estimates of the number of fibers in the nerve and their diameters are only adequately assessed in exact transverse sections. Staining techniques that can be used to identify nerve fibers and other components within peripheral nerves are summarized in Table 10.1. Longitudinal sections of peripheral nerve are less valuable than transverse sections but teased nerve fibers are very valuable for detecting segmental demyelination and remyelination and for assess-ing past axonal degeneration and regeneration. In a transverse section of a human sural nerve there are approximately 8000 myelinated fibers per mrrr', whereas the unmyelinated axons are more numerous at 30,000 per mrrr'. Peripheral nerve fibers are classified as class A, class B, and class C fibers according to their size, function, and the speed at which they conduct nerve impulses. Class A fibers are myelinated and are further subdivided into six groups covering three size ranges. The largest are 10 to 20 11m diameter myelinated fibers that conduct at 50 to 100 m/ sec; myelinated fibers 5 to 15 11min diameter conduct at Technique Application A. General 1.Hematoxylin and eosin 2. Hematoxylin-van Gieason 3. Reticulin stains 4. Masson's trichrome 5. Alcian blue 6. Toluidine blue B. Stains for myelin 1. Luxol fast blue 2. Loyez 3. Osmium 4. Periodic acid-Schiff 5. Polarized light 6. Marchi's method 7. Oil red 0 C. Stains for axons 1.Palmgren's of Bodian's D. 0.5 to 1 urnsections 1. Toluidine blue 2. Toluidine blue and carbol fuschin 3. Immunohistochemistry can be performed on these sections E. Electron microscopy F.Teased fibers 1. Osmium tetraoxide stained 2. Enzyme histochemistry a. Mitochondrial enzymes b. Acid Phosphatase c. Polarized light 3. Lipid histochemistry a. Sudan black B b. Oil red 0 4. Immunohistochemistry a. S-100 protein b. CD57 c. CD56 d. Calretinin e. CD146 f. Soxl0 g. GFAP h. PGP 9.5 i. Myelin basic protein j.Neurofilaments k. Epithelial membrane antigen/ Glut-l/Claudin-l I.CD34 m. CD68 /CD163 n. GAP 43Detection of inflammation, myelin and axons Collagen stains red; myelin black Basement membrane around each Schwann cell in normal nerve and schwannomas. Fibrinoid necrosis in vasculitis Glycosaminoglycans stain blue Mast cells in paraffin section general stain for 1 urnresin section, metachromatic stain for sulfatide lipid. Myelin stains blue; can be combined with silver stains for axons. Myelin stains black Myelin stains black Myelin stains bright pink Normal myelin, birefringent; degenerating myelin isotropic Degenerating myelin stains black; normal myelin is unstained Degenerating myelin stains bright red; normal myelin pink Axons stains black. Myelin stains black; axons unstained; Schwann cells and other cells, blue; collagen, blue. Myelin stains black; axons unstained; cell and collagen, pink/blue. Myelin; nodes of Ranvier; demyelination and remyelination Schwann cytoplasm; axoplasm. Lysosomal activity with degenerating myelin Myelin Myelin Normal and degenerating myelin Schwann cells; schwannomas, neurofibromas Schwann cells; schwannomas, neurofibromas Neurons, axons, Schwann cells; schwannomas Schwann cells and some schwannomas Schwann cells and some schwannomas Schwann cells, melanocytes, schwannomas, neurofibromas and melanomas Some schwannoma cells; possibly unmyelinated Neurons, axons, Schwann cells and some schwannomas Myelin Axons Perineurium; perineuriomas CD34-positive endoneuria I fibroblasts Endoneurialmacrophages Regenerating axons 20 to 90 m/sec, and 1 to 7 urn diameter myelinated fibers conduct at 12 to 30 m/sec. Class B fibers are myelinated preganglionic autonomic fibers about 3 urn in diameter and conduct at 3 to 15 m/sec. Unmyelinated fibers are small, conduct impulses at 0.3 to 1.6 m/sec, and include postganglionic autonomic and afferent sensory fibers, including pain fibers.Myelinated Axons Ultrastructure Although myelinated nerve fibers can be demonstrated in par-affin sections, they are best visualized by light microscopy in 0.5 to 1 urn thick toluidine blue stained resin sections. They exhibit a bimodal distribution of fiber diameter in the normal nerve with peaks at 5 and 13 urn and a range of 2 to 20 urn. Most axons above 3 urnin diameter are myelinated. Although along much of its length a myelinated nerve fiber has a circular outline in cross section, there is considerable variation in shape within the normal nerve, especially in the perinuclear regions and in the regions around the node of Ranvier. The axon itself is limited by a smooth plasma mem-brane, that is separated from the encompass-ing Schwann cell by a 10 to 20 nm gap (periaxonal space of Klebs). The axonal cytoplasm contains mitochondria, cisternae of smooth endoplasmic reticulum, occasional ribosomes and glycogen granules, peroxisomes, and vesicles containing neurotransmitters. The most prominent components of the axoplasm, how-ever, are the filamentous and tubular structures. Microfila-ments, 5 to 7 urn in diameter, are composed of chains of actin and comprise approximately 10% of the total axonal protein. They are virtually confined to the cortical zone fibers, nerve fibers in longitudinal section, andnerve fibers in transverse section. A. In teased fibers, nodes of Ranvierare sepa-rated by internodal portions of the Schwann cell and myelin sheath. The Schwann cell nucleus is roughly in the center of the internode. B. Longitudinal section through the node of Ranvier shows how the myelin sheath terminates as a series of end-loops. The axon narrows as it passes through the node of Ranvier. C.Transverse sections of periph-eral nerve as seen in electron micrographs and 1 urnresin sections are here related to the different portions of the internode and the node of Ranvier. From left to right, the paranodal region shows crenation of both axon and myelin sheath in largerfibers. At the node of Ranvier the axon is small and coated by radially arranged Schwann cell processes and myelin end-loops. Throughout most ofthe internode the myelinated fiber is circular. In the region of the nucleus, the axon and the myelin sheath may be ovoid rather than circular in outline.of the axoplasm immediately beneath the axolemma. Neurofilaments are 8 to 10 urn intermediate filaments of indeterminant length and they constitute a major filamentous component in larger axons. They were described originally by Ram6n y Cajal and Bielschowsky as argentophilic neurofibrillae. In the neuro-nal perikaryon, neurofilaments tend to appear in multiple whorled bundles with no clear orientation to elements of the cell. In the axons, however, neurofilaments appear in longitudinal, mostly parallel orientation. Small arm-like filaments are seen by electron microscopy. They project from the surface of the neurofilaments to form an irregular polygonal lattice. Neurofilaments are composed of protein triplets that are chemically and immunochemically distinct. Three major subunits are recognized and are classified according to their molecular weights of 68,000, 150,000, and 200,000 Daltons. Within axons, neurofilaments are phosphorylated and are immunocytochemically distinct from the non-phosphorylated filaments within neuron cell perinuclear region. The axon contains mitochondria, small vesicles, and numerous neurofilaments and neurotubules cut in cross section. A distinct periaxonal space separates the axon from its encompassing Schwann cell. Myelin is compacted except at the exter-nal mesaxon and internally around the internal mesaxon near the axon itself. Part of a Schmidt-Lanterman incisure is seen on the inside of the myelin sheath. Abundant rough and smooth surfaced endoplas-mic reticulum is seen in the perinuclear cytoplasm of the Schwann cell. A basement membrane surrounds the Schwann cell plasma mem-brane and endoneuria I collagen fibers are seen cut in cross section. Electron micrograph; inset. bodies. Immunocytochemistry for neurofilament protein is often valuable for detecting large- or medium-sized axons in normal nerves, in traumatic lesions, in tumors involving peripheral nerves, and occasionally for detecting axonal processes in neuronal tumors. The third "filamentous" component in the axoplasm is the microtubule. Microtubules are cylindri-cal, unbranched, longitudinally oriented, hol-low tubules 24 nm in diameter and composed of globular subunits of tubulin 4 to 5 nm in diameter. Periodic radial projections of high molecular weight proteins, that are part of the microtubule-associated proteins, arise from the surface of the neurotubules. These arm-like projections bind neurofilaments and actin filaments, and together form neurotubule-neurofilament-actin filament lattices. The three-dimensional lattices form an ordered structure in the axoplasm that appears to play an important role in axonal transport and contributes directly to the axon's shape. Microtubules also direct the transport of vesicular organ-elles between the cell body and the axon and thereby deter-mine, in part, the composition of the axon. Axoplasmic Flow In 1906, Scott proposed that neuron cell bodies secreted "growing substances" in order to maintain the function of the axon. He suggested that such substances pass down the axon cytoplasm to the axon terminals. This suggestion was endorsed by Ram6n y Cajal when he observed how regen-eration occurs from the proximal stump of a damaged axon as long as continuity with the cell body is maintained. More definitive evidence of axonal transport was provided later by experimental studies using autoradiography and other techniques. Not only can labeled substances such as tritiated leucine be traced by autoradiography as they are transported along axons from the cell body, but the transport of organelles within the axon can also be directly observed by the use of dark field microscopy or Nomarsky optics. The term axoplasmic flow was coined by Weiss to describe the movement of different materials along the axoplasm. Axo-plasmic flow and transport occur in two directions, away from the cell body and toward the cell body. Anterograde axoplasmic transport occurs at two veloci-ties-fast and slow. Most organelles and large molecular weight substances within the axon are conveyed by fast axo-plasmic transport, up to 400 mm/day. If a ligature is placed around a nerve, transported material accumulates proxi-mal to the ligature and to some degree distal to it, due to interference with anterograde and retrograde transport, that both occur at the same rate and by the same mechanisms. The filamentous lattice component of neurotubules, neu-rofilaments and actin filaments is responsible for fast axo-plasmic flow, and these three elements probably act as rails along which the various transported organelles and sub-stances move. Fast axoplasmic transport is dependent on oxidative energy mechanisms and adenosine triphosphate; it also depends on calcium and magnesium ions, and is blocked by calcium channel blocking agents. Some sub-stances, such as trifluoperazine, that block calmodulin (cal-cium activating protein) also block axoplasmic flow. Neu-rotubules, as an integral part of the axoplasmic transport mechanism, are depolymerized by cold and by colchicine; vincristine and vinblastine are known to bind tubulin and prevent the normal assembly of neurotubules. Such sub-stances block fast axoplasmic flow. Retrograde axoplasmic transport may convey infor-mation and organelles back to the cell body. In immature nerves, NGF is taken up by nerve terminals and retro-gradely transported to the cell body, where it may playa role in the maturation of neurons. It has been suggested that the transport of such growth factors may also influ-ence the metabolism of mature neurons and the absence of such signals from the distal part of the neuron when the axon is severed may trigger chromatolysis. Retro-grade transport is also a pathway by which certain toxins and some metals (lead, cadmium and mercury) may bypass the blood-brain barrier and accumu-late in neurons. Neurotropic viruses such as herpes, rabies, and poliomyelitis may be transported to the central nervous system by retrograde transport. In addition to toxic neuropathies, axonal transport is defective in diabe-tes and peroneal muscular atrophy and probably in amyo-trophic lateral sclerosis. Axoplasmic transport is reduced with age. Slow axoplasmic transport at 1 to 3 mm/day concerns the distal movement of cytoskeletal elements such as neurofilaments, microtubules, and actin. It is a one-way process and neurofilaments are broken down by calcium activated proteases at the distal end of the axon. Similarly, microtubules are depolymerized distally. Various tox-ins such as hexocarbons and their derivatives may interfere with slow axoplasmic transport so that neurofilaments accu-mulate and form large swellings within the axon. It is thought that neurofilaments within an axon may act primarily to maintain the bulk and the shape of large axons; neurofilaments are less numerous in small axons. The Periaxonal Space of Klebs As the Schwann cell enwraps the axon, it leaves a space, 20 nm wide, between the Schwann cell membrane and the axolemma; this is the periaxonal space of Klebs. This space is in continuity with the extracellular space at the node of Ranvier through a narrow helical chan-nel at the site where the terminal cytoplasmic processes of the Schwann cell approach the axolemma . The maintenance of the periaxonal space of Klebs appears to be mediated by an intrinsic 100 KDa MAG in the periaxonal membrane of the Schwann cell. This protein has a heavily glycosylated domain, with sialic acid and sulfate residues on the external surface of the plasma membrane extending into the periaxonal space; in fact, about half of the peptide of MAG is in the periaxonal space . Mutant mice that do not express MAG do not form a periaxonal space and the Schwann cell membrane fuses with the axolemma. Experimental studies with giant squid axons and mammalian nerve axons show that there is an increase in potassium concentration in the periaxonal space during repetitive conduction of nerve impulses. The full Significance of the periaxonal space, however, is not clearly understood. Schwann Cells In his book on the microscopic structure of animals and plants published in Berlin in 1839, Theodore von Schwann identified a vague sheath of cells within nerve fibers; these cells have subsequently borne his name as Schwann cells. As described previously in the section on development of peripheral nerves, Schwann cells are derived from the neu-ral crest and migrate with growing axons into the developing peripheral nerves. Schwann cells produce NGF both in development and during regeneration and as the nerves grow, Schwann cells divide axons into groups and eventu-ally establish 1:1 relationships with the larger fibers, that they will ultimately myelinate. Immature proliferat-ing Schwann cells have a relatively large volume of cyto-plasm compared with mature Schwann cells. The Schwann cytoplasm is rich in mitochondria, polyribosomes, Golgi cisterns, and rough endoplasmic reticulum. The cytoskeleton within the cells includes vimentin inter-mediate filaments and is particularly obvious during the active proliferative and migrating phases of development and regeneration. Schwann cells in a normal adult peripheral nerve are associated with both myelinated fibers and unmyelinated fibers. In myelinated fibers the Schwann cytoplasm is divided into two compartments; around the nucleus and on the outside of the myelin sheath, and that thin rim of cytoplasm on the inside of the myelin sheath and around the internal mesaxon. Using electron micros-copy, Schwann cells within a nerve can be identified by their relationship with myelinated or unmyelinated fibers. In damaged peripheral nerves, however, Schwann cells can be identified most easily by the presence of an investing basement membrane. Other cells within the endoneurium, such as fibroblasts, do not have a basement membrane; and, although macrophages may invade the basement membrane tubes, they have a distinct ruffled bor-der that distinguishes them from Schwann cells. Perineu-rial cells may be found in the endoneurial compartment, particularly in damaged nerves; they possess a basement membrane but they can be distinguished from Schwann cells by the presence of tight junctions that are not a fea-ture of Schwann cells. With increasing age, nor-mal Schwann cells accumulate lipofuscin and lamellated structures in the paranuclear cytoplasm in the form of Pigranules of Reich. Such granules are composed of wide spaced lamellated structures and amorphous osmiophilic material; they are rich in acid phosphatase and stain meta-chromatically with toluidine blue in frozen sections. Other inclusions such as the corpuscles of Elzholz are seen in Schwann cytoplasm; these bodies are spherical, 0.5 to 2.0 11min diameter, and stain intensely with the Marchi method. Few Itgranules remain in Schwann cells following nerve damage in which there has been extensive Schwann cell mitosis and proliferation. In addition to an investing basement membrane, composed of laminin, fibronectin, and entactin/nidogen, Schwann cells also produce heparan sulfate, n-sydecan, glypican, collagen types I, III, IV, and V, P-1 and P-4 inte-grin, and the protein BM-40. All these secreted prod-ucts are incorporated into the basement membrane except for type I and type II collagens. Schwann cells can be identified in paraffin sections by immunocytochemistry and by the presence of close investment by reticulin stain-ing. There is a rich reticulin network investing each cell, not only in the normal peripheral nerve but also in Schwann cell tumors. S-100 protein in the cytoplasm and nuclei of Schwann cells can be identified by immunocytochemistry; this acidic protein, that is 100% soluble in ammonium sulfate at neutral pH, described by B.W. Moore in 1965, is a calcium-binding EF-hand type molecule, has no known function but is present in Schwann cells and not in fibroblasts or perineurial cells. In-vitro studies have reported the presence of Schwann cells that are weakly reactive for S-l 00 protein that may correspond to the non-myelinating cell population. Schwann cells are also immunolabeled using E-cadherin CD56 and CD57 but perineurial cells are again negative. Calretinin, the 29-kd, calcium-binding protein that also belongs to the family of EF hand pro-teins, is expressed in Schwann cells and in up to 94% of schwannomas. Normal and some neoplastic Schwarm cells also express PGP 9.5 and the cell adhesion molecule CD146. Occasionally, Schwann cells are labeled by anti-GFAP antibodies. GFAP immunoreactivity in the PNS has been demonstrated in enteric ganglia, olfactory nerve cells and in Schwarm cells in the sciatic, splenic and vagus nerves. Schwann cells also participate in the forma-tion, function and maintenance of neuromuscular junctions and Meissner corpuscles. These "terminal Schwann cells" may be identified by their expression of Herp-protein, which is not present in non-terminal myelinating Schwann cells. An interesting and peculiar intermediate glial cell type known as the olfactory ensheathing cell is associated with neuronal processes of the olfactory bulb; OECs share astrocytic and Schwann cell phenotypes; they promote axonal regeneration and are potentially useful cells for xenotransplantation procedures. Myelin Myelin sheaths appear as slightly basophilic rings in hema-toxylin and eosin-stained transverse paraffin sections of nerve. They can be more prominently stained by Luxol fast blue or by hematoxylin stains such as Loyez. In frozen sections, myelin is well depicted by Sudan black staining and in unstained frozen sections myelin can be identified due to its birefringence in polarized light, a technique that is particularly suitable for identifying myelin in enzyme histochemical prepara-tions. Myelin is formed by the fusion of Schwann cell membranes and, by electron microscopy, it is seen as a regularly repeating lamellated structure with a 12 to 18 nm periodicity. On the outer and inner aspects of the sheath, external and internal mesaxons can be traced from the cell surface. The myelin membrane is divided into two structurally and biochemically distinct domains: the compact and the non-compact myelin, each of which is characterized by a unique set of proteins. Compact myelin, for instance, contains Po, PMP22 and MBP, whereas non-compact myelin contains MAG, Cx32, a6~4 integrin and E-cadherin. As the external aspects of the Schwann cell membranes fuse to produce compact myelin, an interrupted interperiod line forms in the myelin. The more densely stained period line is formed by fusion of the cytoplasmic aspects of the cell membrane. A narrow cleft can be resolved between the components of the interperiod line. In myelinating Schwann cells non-compact myelin is present in paranodal loops, Schmidt-Lanterman incisures, in the nodal microvilli and in the inner and outer edges of the myelin. Several types of cell junctions, including tight, gap and adherens junctions, are seen between the myelin lamellae (known as auto typic junctions). Biochemically, myelin is 75% lipid and 25% protein. The major lipids are cholesterol, sphingomyelin, and galac-tolipids, which are present in a rather higher proportion than they are in other cell membranes. It is the arrange-ment of the lipids that accounts for the liquid crystalline anisotropic nature of normal myelin sheaths that are bire-fringent in polarized light. Esterification of the choles-terol in degenerating myelin produces the isotropic, non-birefringent lipid droplets that can be detected by Sudan dyes, by oil red 0,and by the Marchi technique (Table 10.1). As myelin degenerates and the cholesterol becomes esterified, the ultrastructural lamellated pattern of myelin is lost and replaced by the amorphous osmiophilic globules seen in electron micrographs. More than half the protein in myelin is a transmembrane 28 to 30 KDa glycoprotein PO; other proteins are PI and P2. PO mediates homophilic adhesive interactions between Schwann cell plasma mem-branes; it is a key structural constituent of both the major dense line and interperiod line of compact myelin, and it is involved in myelin compaction. Numerous mutations in PO have been described in a variety of demyelinating dis-eases. Although the lipid composition of myelin in the periph-eral nervous system is very similar to that of the central ner-vous system, the protein components are markedly different. CNS myelin has no PO protein but has a proteolipidthat is soluble in organic solvents; it also has an 18 KDa basic protein that is probably homologous to the PI pro-tein of peripheral nerve myelin. These biochemical differ-ences may account for differences in the structure between peripheral and central nervous system myelin; for example, the spaces between the dense lines is less for CNS myelin. Biochemical differences in the proteins definitely account for the distinct antigenicities of peripheral and central nervous system myelin. Thus, injection of CNS myelin with Freund's adjuvant will produce autoimmune encephalomyelitis in experimental animals with destruc-tion of myelin in the brain and spinal cord, whereas injection of peripheral nervous system myelin with Freund's adjuvant will produce autoimmune neuritis with demyelin-ation in the peripheral nervous system. Myelin sheaths are essential for the normal functioning of the peripheral nervous system and in those hereditary neuropathies in which myelination is defective, severe dis-ability and retardation of development are seen. Acting as a biological electrical insulator, myelin allows discontinu-ous and very rapid conduction of a wave of depo-larization along the nerve fiber. It appears that myelination is an evolutionary adaptation that allows increased conduc-tion velocities without excessive increases in axon diameter. Myelination in the peripheral nervous system in humans occurs well in advance of that of the central nervous sys-tem. Although there is little myelin in human cerebral hemispheres at birth, myelin sheaths have already started to form around peripheral nerves at this time. Myelination is initiated by contact between Schwann cells and future myelinated axons. The Schwann cell rotates around the axon and may form 50 or more spirals, resulting in for-mation of the myelin sheath. As the Schwann cell differentiates and produces a base-ment membrane, it acquires polarity via interaction of its cytoskeleton and some basement membrane components. The Schwann cell then begins to extend processes around individual axons. Once the lips of the Schwann cell start to wrap around the axon, they generate traction to pull the whole cell round and a spiral wrapping composed of many lamellae is formed. The importance of basement membrane formation as a prerequisite for the formation of myelin is emphasized by the lack of myelination when the basement membrane is deficient. MAG also plays an important role in myelination; it is present in the membranes of Schwann cells around myelinated fibers but not in those cells associated with unmyelinated fibers. MAG probably functions through its interaction with the Schwann cell cytoskeleton and this facilitates process lengthening and rotation during myelination. Periaxin is a 47 KDa pro-tein constituent of the dystroglycan-dystrophin-related pro-tein-2 complex that links the Schwann cell cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix; it is located in the periaxonal region of Schwann cell plasma membranes and possibly interacts with MAG during myelination. Mutations in the peri-axin gene result in the autosomal recessive demyelinating Charcot-Marie-Tooth and Dejerine=Sottas diseases. As myelination proceeds, cyto-plasm is expressed from the spiral of Schwann cell pro-cesses and membranes compact to form the 12 to 18 nm lamellated structure of myelin. The length of an embryonic Schwann cell is 30 to 60 urnand it becomes associated with that length of axon in the developing nerve. As the nerve lengthens with growth of the body and limbs, so does the Schwann cell such that the length of the Schwann cell or internodal distance in myelinated fibers reaches some 190 urn at 18 weeks gestation and 475 urnat birth. In the adult nerve, normal Schwann cells may extend for up to 1 mm in length along myelinated fibers. Schwann cells associ-ated with unmyelinated fibers lengthen to reach approxi-mately 250 urnin the adult sural nerve. Following damage to a peripheral nerve, Schwann cell lengths revert to their embryonic length and thus give short internodes in regen-erating and remyelinating nerve fibers (see and 10.14). Schmidt-Lanterman Clefts or Incisures Once viewed as artifacts, the clefts or incisures described by H.D. Schmidt and A.J. Lanterman are now known to be fixed components of the myelin sheath. Each Schmidt-Lanterman incisureconsists of a continuous spiral of Schwarm cytoplasm that runs from the outer to the inner Schwann cell compartment in an oblique fashion at about 9 degrees to the long axis of the sheath. The cleft splits the cytoplas-mic membranes at the major dense line and forms a route for the passage of substances from the outer cytoplasmic layer through the myelin sheath to the inner cytoplasm. This function was suggested by Ranvier as early as 1897. Near the external surface of the cleft, stacks of desmosome-like structures and gap junctions rich in connexin 32, are sometimes seen, possibly maintaining the integrity of the spiral. The cell junction proteins, Claudin-5, MUPPl, E-cadherin as well as a 155 KDa isoform of neurofascin, have been selectively detected at the S-L I. Cytoplasm in the clefts contains membrane-bound dense bodies, lyso-somes, an occasional mitochondrion, and a single microtu-bule that runs circumferentially around the fiber; this microtubule may be associated with transport and with stabilization of the cytoplasmic spiral. The number of Schmidt-Lanterman clefts correlates with the diameter of the axon; the larger the fiber, the more clefts in the myelin sheath per Schwann cell. The presence of these clefts throughout myelogenesis suggests that they are an important functional part of the sheath. Balice-Gordon et al have suggested that the incisures may provide some degree of flexibility and may protect the peripheral nerve from mechanical stress during stretching and recoil. It also seems obvious that they are pathways of communication Longitudinal section of peripheral nerve: a Schmidt-Lanterman incisure. Blebs of cytoplasm are seen running through the myelin sheath. Densities in the cytoplasm suggest some form of junction between the spiral turns of the incisure. The axon is cut tangentially (Reprinted from: Weller RD, Cervos Navarro J.Pathology of peripheral nerves: A practical Approach. London: Butterworths; 1977with permission.) between the inner and outer Schwann cell cytoplasm but their full significance remains to be elucidated. Ramon y Cajal described longitudinal cytoplasmic channels, similar to S-L I, that lie beneath the surface of the Schwann cell plasma membrane that are known to be separated from each other by the appositions formed by the periaxin-DRP2-dystroglycan complexes. Microtubule-based transport in these bands permits the Schwann cells to lengthen in response to axonal growth. Interestingly Schwann cells lacking longitudinal bands of Cajal are unable to keep pace with axon growth, suggesting a role in regulating the ability of Schwann cells to increase in length. Nodes of Ranvier With the introduction of techniques whereby individually separated or teased myelinated nerve fibers could be stained black with osmium tetroxide, a new view of nerve fibers was obtained. In his publication of 1876, L.A. Ranvier, Professor of Histology in Paris described and illustrated the constric-tions or "etranglernents annulaires", that are now known as the nodes of Ranvier. The functions of the node at that time were not known but Ranvier did suggest that the constrictions may prevent displacement or flow of the semi-liquid myelin along the nerve fibers. He also suggested that the gap in the myelin sheath at the node of Ranvier might allow diffusion of nutrients into the axon. In teased fibers stained with osmium tetroxide or viewed in polarized light, the nodal gap is readily visible, as is the bulbous swelling of the fiber on either side of the node of Ranvier. The distance between each node along a myelinated fiber is approximately pro-portional to the thickness of the myelin sheath. In a normal adult mammalian nerve, internodal segments between the nodes of Ranvier vary from 200 to 1500 11min length; the Schwann cell nucleus is usually sited around the middle of the internode. Histologic study of 1 11mtransverse resin sections of nerve and electron microscopic observations reveal a com-plex structure at the node of Ranvier and in the paranodal regions. As the axon approaches a node of Ranvier, it may become cruciform in cross section, especially in large fibers. Deep furrows develop in the surrounding myelin sheath, and those furrows are filled with cytoplasm rich in mitochondria. As the axon passes through the node it is reduced to one-third or one-sixth of its internodal diame-ter although there may be a slight swelling at the midpoint of the node. Amorphous, osmiophilic material rich in ankyrin G, NrCAM, neurofascins and pIV-spectrin may be depos-ited under the axolemma. Ankyrin-binding proteins are also localized in the initial segment of the axon, the voltage-dependent sodium channel, the sodium/potas-sium ATPase and the sodium/calcium exchanger. These specialized areas of axon membrane may reflect the site of high ionic current density during transmission of a nerve impulse. Numerous ion channels are present in the nodal region of the axolemma and they are responsible for the changes in ionic milieu that occur during the conduc-tion of nerve impulses. There is considerable special-ization of the Schwann cell and the myelin sheath at the node of Ranvier. The myelin sheath terminates by forming dilated loop-like structures that are closely apposed to the axon surface. Occasionally, desmosome-like structures are formed between Schwann cell terminal loops. The tight junction protein Claudin-2, and the ERZ (Ezrin, radizin, moesin) proteins have been identified as a ring that surrounds N a+ channels at the node of Ranvier, possibly participating in the junctions formed at the outer collars of two adjacent Schwann cells at the node zone. The abundance of mitochondria in the paranodal cyto-plasm is an indication of the high energy requirements of the node. Right in the center of the node, the myelin end-loops are replaced by multiple finger-like Schwann cell pro-cesses that contain f-actin and are 70 to 100 nm in diameter. The villi extend from the Schwann cells into the nodal gaps and interdigitate with processes of adja-cent Schwann cells. This interlacing pattern of cell processes around the axon at the node of Ranvier is more prominent and complex in larger fibers.Basement membrane from the two adjacent Schwann cells is continuous over the nodal gap. Around the villous Schwann cell processes there is an electron-dense polyan-ionic-rich material that constitutes the extracellular matrix of the node. This gap substance creates a ring-like structure and may provide an ion pool necessary for nodal function. It has been demonstrated that the gap substance contains glycosaminoglycans with cation-binding substances. The myelin sheath acts as a biological insulator for the internodal portion of the axons. Conduction of impulses along myelinated fibers proceeds in a discon-tinuous manner from node to node (rapid salutatory nerve conduction). Numerous sodium channels with a suggested density of approximately 100,000 per 11m2 are present on the axolemma at the node of Ranvier in contrast to the very low density of sodium channels in the internodal axon membrane; the internodal membrane may be regarded as inexcitable. Potassium channels show a complementary distribution to that of the sodium channels; they are less common than in the nodal membrane but are present in the paranodal and inter-nodal axon membrane. Potassium channels contribute to the stabilization of the axon by preventing repetitive firing responses to a single stimulus and also help to maintain the resting potential of the myelinated fiber. In demyelinating diseases, when the myelin sheath is stripped from the axon, there is gross slowing or cessation of nerve conduction along the affected fibers. Spread of a con-tinuous wave of depolarization along the axon membrane is prevented due to the absence of an adequate density of sodium channels in the internodal axon membrane. Fur-thermore, the exposure of the internodal axon cell mem-brane, rich in potassium channels, will also interfere with induction of the impulse. Unmyelinated Axons Unmyelinated fibers can be detected as unstained struc-tures by light microscopy in toluidine blue stained 0.5 11m transverse resin sections of peripheral nerve. However, at 1 to 3 11mdiameter, they are almost at the limit of resolution and are only seen in good quality sections. Such fibers can be stained by silver techniques such as Palmgren or Bodian but are poorly visualized in immunocytochemical preparations using antineurofilament antibodies, probably because unmyelinated fibers contain few neurofilaments and a high proportion of micro tubules . The structure of unmyelinated fibers and their quantita-tion are most adequately studied by transmission electron microscopy. They are more numerous than myelinated fibers in mixed peripheral nerves by a factor of 3 or 4: 1 and were first recognized in 1838 by the Polish physician R.Remak as "fibriae organicae"; the Schwann cells associated with unmyelinated axons are sometimes referred to as Remak cells. Schwann cells verse section. The axons lAX) are surrounded by Schwann cells. Mesaxons IMES). Stacks of Schwann cell processes 1ST) are com-monly seen in adult nerves. Electron micrograph Ix13,OOO). have the potential to differentiate into either a myelinating or non-myelinating ensheathing cell, depending upon the signals received from the axons that they contact, but the reason why some axons are myelinated and others are not is still unknown. A minimum caliber of Ium is required before an axon can be myelinated. Certain molecules such as Ll, NCAM, integrins and neurofascin are known to be expressed on unmyelinated axons and are down regu-lated during axonal myelination. Schwann cells around myelinated and unmyelinated axons may thus be regarded as originating from the same cell type but developing mor-phological, biochemical, and physiological differences. The cytoplasm of Schwann cells associated with unmy-elinated fibers contains a Golgi apparatus, rough endoplas-mic reticulum, mitochondria, microtubules, and micro-filaments and may exhibit centrioles near the nucleus. 1tgranules, however, are not present although there are lysosomes containing acid phosphatase present in the cyto-plasm. The nuclei of these cells are ellipsoid with one or more prominent nucleoli. A continuous basement mem-brane surrounds each cell. Schwann cells associated with unmyelinated fibers express different phenotypic char-acteristics from Schwann cells around myelinated axons. Although both types of Schwann cell contain immunocyto-chemically detectable vimentin intermediate filaments andS-100 protein, and almost the same basement membrane components, Schwann cells associated with unmyelinated axons are more likely to express GFAP. Such cells also lack MAG that is apparently necessary for segregation and myelination ofaxons. Mycobacterium leprae (Hansen's bacilli) colonize non-myelinating Remak cells by attaching to laminin-2 and its receptor a-dystroglycan. Myelin-form-ing Schwann cells seem to be relatively free from infec-tion by M. leprae. There is often a strong cell-mediated immune response in leprosy with extensive inflammation and peripheral nerve damage that causes paralysis and loss of sensation and frequently leads to unintentional mutila-tion of hands and feet. Electron microscopy of transverse sections of nor-mal peripheral nerve shows how numerous unmyelinated axons 0.2 to 3.5 urn in diameter are associated with a single Schwann cell. Short mesaxons extend from the surface of the cell and the Schwann cell is separated from the axon plasma membrane by a space 10 to 15 urn wide that is analogous to the periaxonal space of Klebs seen around myelinated fibers. Although many axons may be gathered close to the cell body in the perinuclear region of the Schwann cell away from the nuclear region, single axons become more widely separated and are enclosed by thin Schwann cell processes. Each Schwann cell associated with unmyelinated axons in the sural nerve is between 200 and 500 urn in length. As axons pass from one Schwann cell to another, they are surrounded by flattened irregular, finger-like processes that interlock and become telescoped into the adjacent Schwann cell. The surface of the axon is therefore always in contact with the Schwann cell. In young children, only a single thin layer of Schwann cytoplasm surrounds each axon away from the nuclear region; but in adult nerves, the picture is more complex with several Schwann cell processes stacked together and associated with each unmyelinated axon. Pockets of collagen bundles are frequently invaginated into the surface of Schwann cells associated with unmy-elinated fibers, particularly in aging nerves and when there is loss of unmyelinated fibers. The pock-ets of collagen fibers are separated from the surface of the Schwann cell by a layer of basement membrane. The sig-nificance of this phenomenon is not fully known. Endocrine cells have been identified within the peri-neurium in close contact with unmyelinated nerves in the lamina propria of the appendix. These cells were demonstrated in 1924 by Masson and later Aubock coined the term 'endocrine cell-non-myelinated fiber complex,' emphasizing the association between endocrine cells and unmyelinated fibers. These complexes are separated from the interstitial connective tissue by a common con-tinuous basement membrane, leaving the cells in intimate contact with each other. It has been suggested that such endocrine cells could participate in the pathogenesis of the so-called neuromas of the appendix and appendiceal carci-noids. It is not known whether such endocrine cells exist in nerves other than those located in the wall of the appendix but there are reports of extraepithelial carcinoid tumors in stomach, small intestine, and bronchus, which suggests that there may also be endocrine cells related to nerves in these regions. Interesting immunological properties have been ascribed to Schwann cells. Numerous studies have shown that Schwann cells display a large repertoire of properties, ranging from the participation in antigen presentation, to secretion of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines, che-mokines and neurotrophic factors. Schwann cells express Ia determinants on their membranes and are able to present foreign antigens to specific synergic T cells. When Schwann cells are exposed to inflammatory cytokines they have the capacity to induce selective damage to T-cells and have the potential to regulate the immune response in the peripheral nervous system. A role for Schwann cells has been suggested in myasthenia gravis. Schwann cells also express complement receptor CR1 and CD-59, a 19 to 25 KDa glycoprotein, that binds to complement proteins C8 and C9 in the assem-bling cytolytic membrane attack complex. This may indicate that regulation of complement activation by these proteins is important in neural host defense mechanisms and may be implicated in the complement mediated dam-age occurring in inflammatory demyelinating disease such as Cuillian-Barre syndrome. CORRELATION OF NORMAL HISTOLOGY WITH THE PATHOLOGY OF PERIPHERAL NERVES Handling and Preparation of Peripheral Nerve Biopsy and Autopsy Specimens The sural nerve is the nerve that is most commonly biopsied in the investigation of peripheral neuropathies. It is a sensory nerve so that in some motor neuropathies it may be totally normal, in which case examination of small branches of motor nerves within a muscle biopsy may be more fruit-ful. At autopsy, a wider range of motor and sensory nerves may be sampled, depending on the clinical picture. Whether taken at biopsy or autopsy, peripheral nerves are very easily damaged. The myelin sheaths are semiliquid and may be crushed by indelicate handling. The specimen should only be gripped at one end and then gently dissected free before laying it, very gently stretched, on a piece of dry card and placing it in fixative or in liquid nitro-gen for snap freezing. Fresh, frozen nerve should be used for enzyme and lipid histochemical studies whereas formalin-fixed nerve can be embedded in paraffin for the applica-tion of routine stains and immunocytochemistry (Table 10.1). Although formalin-fixed material can be used for the preparation of 0.5 to 1 urn resin-embedded sections and for electron microscopy, ideally the tissue should be fixed in Histologic artifact in a peripheral nerve. In this trans-verse resin section, the fascicle to the left of the picture is well pre-served. However, there is extensive recent hemorrhage that occurred during the biopsy procedure; the myelinated axons in the nerve fascicle are squeezed and distorted (riqht]. The 1 urnresin sec-tion is stained with toluidine blue Ix40). glutaraldehyde and postfixed in osmium for ultrastructural studies. Teased fibers can be prepared from either glutaral-dehyde- or formalin-fixed material. The method of preparation really depends on the infor-mation sought. Frozen sections are ideal for detecting abnormal lipids, such as sulfatide in metachromatic leuko-dystrophy, and for detecting the cholesterol ester droplets of degenerating myelin by staining for Sudan red or oil red O. Increased lysosomal enzyme activity as in Krabbe's leu-kodystrophy or in human and experimental neuropathies in which axonal degeneration or segmental demyelination is suspected can be detected in frozen sections stained histochemically for acid phosphatase. Brief formalin or glutaraldehyde fixation can be used in some cases for electron microscopic enzyme histochemistry. Frozen sections can also be used for immunofluorescence for the detection of immunoglobulin binding to myelin sheaths in paraproteinemias. Transverse frozen sections of nerve are ideal for these purposes although they are often more dif-ficult to prepare than longitudinal sections. There is a variety of methods of preparing and examin-ing fixed specimens of peripheral nerve and each method reveals different information. Ideally, exact trans-verse sections should be cut from the peripheral nerve; occasionally, longitudinal sections are also useful par-ticularly for detecting regenerating axons by immuno-cytochemistry. Paraffin-embedded sec-tions can be stained for a variety of histologic stains and for immunocytochemistry to reveal nerve components. Blood vessels and inflammatory exudates are ideally studied in paraffin sections, but quantitation of nerve fibers, the detection of axon degeneration and regeneration, and the assessment of segmental demyelin-ation and remyelination are more satisfactory in 0.5 to 1 urn toluidine blue stained resin sections or by electron microscopy. The presence of amyloid in the endoneurium or giant axons in some hereditary neuropathies and in some toxic neuropathies can be detected both in paraffin-and in resin-embedded sections. Teased preparations are most useful for detecting segmental demyelination and remyelination and for assessing whether axonal degenera-tion and regeneration have occurred within the nerve in the past. Peripheral Neuropathies The pathological diagnosis of a peripheral neuropathy usually requires close clinicopathological correlation and knowledge of the electrophysiological data such as nerve conduction velocities and electromyography. Moder-ate slowing of nerve conduction velocities usually indicates loss of large myelinated fibers, whereas excessive slowing of conduction velocity suggests that segmental demyelin-ation has occurred. Although there are a number of spe-cific histopathological features that aid in the diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy (eg, amyloid, the presence of lepra bacilli, abnormal lipids such as sulfatide within the nerve, giant axons and vasculitis, for the most part, assess-ment of peripheral nerve pathology depends on detection and quantitation of general pathological features and good clinicopathological correlation. General Pathology of Peripheral Nerves The general pathological reactions of peripheral nerves are, for most practical purposes, limited to axonal degen-eration and regeneration and segmental demyelination and remyelination. Hypertrophic changes with onion-bulb formation occur most commonly as a result of recurrent A B c osegmental demyelination and are most often seen in heredi-tary neuropathies. Axonal Degeneration and Regeneration If a neuron in the anterior horn of the gray matter of the spinal cord or in a dorsal root ganglion dies, its axon degen-erates and no regeneration occurs. Such neuronal destruction is seen in poliomyelitis, motor neuron disease, spinal muscular atrophy, and infarction of the spinal cord. Dorsal root ganglion cells may be lost in viral infections such as varicella zoster or in a variety of hereditary sensory neuropathies. If an axon in a peripheral nerve is injured, for example, by trauma, entrap-ment, or ischemia, the distal end of the axon degenerates and subsequently regeneration occurs from the proximal stump of the damaged axon. The success of the regeneration depends on the distance of the site of damage from the nerve end-organ (either motor end-plate or sensory nerve ending) and the amount of scarring or other obstruction laid in the path of the regenerating axons. Axonal degeneration was described by A.V Waller in 1850 in London and the eponym wallerian degeneration is still used. Much of the fundamental work on nerve degener-ation and regeneration, however, was performed by Ram6n y Cajal in the early part of the twentieth century. Twenty-four hours after nerve injury, most myelinated and non-myelin-ated axons start to show degenerative changes. There is retraction of myelin from the nodes of Ranvier and dilatation of Schmidt-Lanterman incisures in the proximal as well as in the distal stump. By 48 hours, myelin and axon changes become more obvious as the axon disintegrates and myelin sheaths become disrupted and form globules ring during axonal degeneration and regeneration. A.Normal nerve. B.By seven days after axonal damage, Schwann cells containing axon and myelin debris have divided to form bands of BOngner. C. Axon sprouts grow from the swollen end-bulb of the proximal axon. D.An axon becomes myelinated. E.Connection with the end-organ is reestablished; regenerated internodes are short. (Reprinted from: Weller RO, Cervos Navarro J. Pathology of peripheral nerves: A practical Approach. London: Butterworths; 1977with permission.) E degeneration 4 days after nerve section. Few axons are visible and myelin is forming globules in Schwann cells and macrophages. The 1 11msection is stained with toluidine blue jx310). B.Axonal regeneration in a human nerve biopsy. Normal myelinated fibers are interspersed with clusters of closely associated thinly myelinated regenerating fibers. The 111msection is stained with toluidine blue jx310). in which axon fragments are enclosed. Disintegration of the myelin appears to start with dilatation of the Schmidt-Lanterman incisures during the first day or two after injury. Myelin debris is initially birefringent and has a lamel-lated ultrastructure, as does normal myelin. But, as pro-teins break down and lysosomal enzymes become active around the myelin debris, cholesterol within the myelin is esterified to cholesterol esters and lipid debris loses its birefringence in polarized light and its lamellated ultrastructure to become amorphous globular lipid, that now stains strongly with Sudan dyes and oil red O. The Mar-chi technique also differentiates between normal myelin and degenerating myelin. During the second week after nerve injury, much of the myelin debris is removed from the distal part of the nerve and regenerative features become more prominent. Axon fragments and myelin debris are broken down by both Schwann cells and macrophages. Schwann cells directly attract macrophages by secretion of different proteins, probably regulated by autocrine circuits involving the neuropoietic cytokines IL-6 and Leukemia inhibitory factor. Macrophages, in addition to their phago-cytic function may help to promote nerve repair through the elaboration of Schwann cell mitogens and may also affect neurons and axonal growth directly through the release of neurotrophins. Although Schwann cell mitoses are seen as early as 24 hours after nerve injury, the peak of proliferation is between 3 and 15 days after nerve damage. As Schwann cells proliferate, they form columns sur-rounded by basement membrane; often redundant, old Schwann cell basement membrane is asso-ciated with these bands. Regenerating axons grow along the bands of Biingner and if regeneration fails, the bands shrink and Schwann cells may disappear and become replaced by fibrous tissue."Importins" are proteins involved in the retrograde transport of substances collectively known as injury signals; such transport is through a complex of proteins acting in association with neurotubules and into the cell nucleus, where gene transcription subsequently occurs. Several easily detectable histologic changes occur dur-ing axonal regeneration. The neuron cell bodies in the ante-rior horns of the spinal cord or in the dorsal root ganglia show changes of chromatolysis during the first 3 weeks after axonal injury. The nerve cell perikaryon swells by some 20%, and the nucleus becomes eccentric as does the nucleolus. Nissl substance (a mixture of rough endo-plasmic reticulum and polyribosomes) is dispersed so that the cytoplasm becomes pale when stained by hematoxylin and eosin or by the Nissl stain. During this stage of chromatolysis, there is a marked increase in polyribosomal ribonucleic acid with an up regulation of a number of regeneration-associated genes, including those encod-ing growth-associated protein-43, cytoskeleton protein-23, p-tubulin and an increase in peptides such as galanin and vase-intestinal polipeptide, reflecting the metabolic events involved in axon regeneration. Regenerative changes in axons are seen within the first few hours after nerve damage but are most easily detected 5 to 20 days after injury. Using immunocytochemistry, growth-associated protein can be identified in regenerat-ing axons 4-21 days after injury. The proximal stump of the axon swells to create a balloon-like structure often 50 11min diameter and 100 11min length. The balloons are filled with organelles and fibrils, which can be detected by electron microscopy; they can be visualized by light micros-copy using immunocytochemical stains for neurofilament protein, GAP 43 or by employing silver stains as used by Ram6n y Cajal when he first described them. Myelin sheaths become stretched around the swollen axon balloons. Starting around the fourth day after injury, multiple nerve sprouts, or neurites, extend from the axon balloon (growth cone) and grow distally at 1 to 2.5 mm/day. As the neurites enter the bands of Bungner, they become invaginated into the surface of the Schwann cell and, if growth continues, they become myelinated. Unmyelinated fibers regenerate in a similar way, but they are smaller and no myelin sheaths form around them. Regenerating neurites can be detected in the classical way by silver staining; but, in cross sections of peripheral nerve, they are best demonstrated in 0.5 to 1 11mresin sections or by electron microscopy. Characteris-tically, regenerating axons form clusters encircled by a single basement membrane. In the light microscope, these clus-ters are recognized by the close association of small, thinly myelinated axons within the nerve; myelin-ated nerve fibers in a normal nerve are well separated from each other by endoneurial collagen. Axon growth and regeneration are stimulated by NGF synthesized by Schwann cells, fibroblasts and macrophages and transported back along the axon by retrograde axo-plasmic transport to stimulate nerve cell protein synthesis. In addition to growth factors, there appears to be topographical affinity between regenerating axons and certain pathways; for example, it appears that regenerating tibial nerve axons grow toward the distal tibial nerve rather than toward the distal peroneal nerves. Connective tissue elements may also playa role in guiding regenerating axons. Neurite-outgrowth-promoting factors on cell surfaces or in the extracellular matrix promote extension of the axon by providing an appropriate "adhesiveness" in the substrate. Both neurotrophic and neurite-outgrowth-promoting factors are essential for axonal growth after injury . The success of regeneration, with axons reaching effec-tive end-organs, may be influenced by several factors. Ifthe injury is far proximal from the end-organ, few regenerating axons may make effective reconnections. But regeneration over short distances may be very effective in the peripheral nervous system. The presence of scar tissue or discontinu-ity of anatomical pathways may also inhibit regeneration. A number of grafting techniques are employed to overcome this problem. If regeneration to the distal stump of a nerve is blocked by scar tissue, axons may grow outside the origi-nal course of the nerve and even back alongside the proxi-mal stump. Thus, small bundles of regenerating neurites, often surrounded by perineurial cells, form amputation neuromas in which interlacing bundles containing axons surrounded by myelin sheaths and with fine perineurial coverings can be detected microscopically. Immunocytochemistry for neurofilament proteins, EMA, Glut-1 and Claudin-1, and S-100 may be very useful in establishing the structure and identity of the nerve bundles in an amputa-tion neuroma. Immunohistochemical and radioimmunoas-say data have shown focal accumulation of sodium channels within the tips of injured axons that may be responsible,in part, for the ectopic axonal excitability and the result-ing abnormal sensory phenomena which frequently complicate peripheral nerve injury. Macrophages migrate into the neuroma within the first two weeks after the injury and later they are seen with numer-ous large cytoplasmic vacuoles filled with myelin fragments. This suggests that macrophages may also participate in the genesis of chronic pain after the neuroma has formed possi-bly by: creating demyelinating axonal regions susceptible to external stimuli, by releasing substances that influ-ence regeneration ofaxons, or by direct action on the denuded remodeling membranes. Axon degeneration, often with regeneration, is a fea-ture of numerous peripheral neuropathies including those associated with diabetes, amyloidosis, infections (such as leprosy), sarcoidosis, paraneoplastic syndromes, vascular disease, and metabolic diseases. Most toxic neu-ropathies result in chronic axonal degeneration at the extreme distal ends of sensory and motor nerves (distal axonopathies). The distal ends of long tracts in the spinal cord are often affected as well as the peripheral nerves. Timely withdrawal of the toxin may allow effective regeneration to occur, but only in the peripheral nerves, not in the spinal cord. Many peripheral neuropathies induced by the diseases itemized above are slowly progressive, so that nerve biopsies in these conditions do not usually reveal the early stages of axonal degeneration and regeneration. More frequently, the his-tologic picture is characterized by loss of large myelinated axons and, to a lesser extent, loss of small myelinated and unmyelinated axons. Nerve root or peripheral nerve com-pression, and trauma to peripheral nerve trunks result in axonal degeneration. Regeneration may be recognized in transverse sections of peripheral nerve by the presence of clusters. In teased fiber preparations, short internodes in the distal part of the nerve indicate that axo-nal degeneration and regeneration have occurred in the past. Segmental Demyelination and Remyelination When demyelination occurs in peripheral nerves, it has a segmental distribution with each segment representing the internodal portion of an axon myelinated by one Schwann cell. Such segments can be con-tiguous and thus demyelination may occur over long lengths of the nerve or in short sporadic segments. The axon remains intact except in severe demyelinating neu-ropathies in which secondary axonal degeneration occurs. Remyelination is often rapid and effective with restoration of nerve function. Demyelination may occur as a result of direct interference with Schwann cell metabolism as in diphtheria; myelin sheaths are broken down through the lysosomal action of Schwann cells although macrophages are later involved in the destruction of myelin debris. Another mechanism is seen in the commonest acute demyelinating neuropathy, Cuillain-Barre syndrome, segmental demyelination and remyelination. A.Normal nerve. B.Early segmental demyelination; retraction of paranodal myelin with widening of the nodal gap. C.Destruction of myelin sheath and Schwann cell mitosis. 0 and E.Remyelination; intercalated short seg-ments. (Reprinted from: Weller RD,Cervos Navarro J. Pathology of peripheral nerves: A practical Approach. London: Butterworths; 1977, with permission.) A in which there is an immunological attack on peripheral nerve myelin by lymphocytes and macrophages; segmen-tal demyelination occurs and is followed by remyelination. Functional recovery occurs following both types of demyelination except in the most severe cases. The first stages of segmental demyelination are seen at the node of Ranvier, where the nodal gap becomes widened; subsequently, the whole internode of myelin may be broken down. This results in severe slowing of conduction of nerve impulses across the demyelinated segment and the onset of symptoms for the patient. Preserved axons remain invaginated within Schwann cells as the myelin sheaths are broken down. Schwann cells pro-liferate and within a few days start to remyelinate the demy-elinated axons by a similar mechanism to that seen during myelination in the fetus. Remyelination may be well advanced by2weeks after demyelination as the thickness of myelin sheaths increases and conduction velocities return to normal. Classically, segmental demyelination can be detected in teased nerve fibers, first by the presence of widening of the gap of the node of Ranvier and then by the presence ofaxons devoid of myelin sheaths. Intercalated thin myelin sheaths along the axon are seen as remyelination proceeds (Fig-ure 10.15). In electron micrographs or in resin-embedded light microscope sections, naked axons can be recognized in transverse section and remyelinating fibers detected by the presence of inappropriately thin myelin sheaths (Fig-ures 10.12-10.14). Segmental demyelination is a feature of a number of peripheral neuropathies, particularly mild vascular damage to peripheral nerves as in rheumatoidB c D E arthritis, diabetes, Cuillain-Barre syndrome, occa-sional toxic neuropathies, and metabolic neuropathies such as metachromatic leukodystrophy. Throughout the range of neuropathies, however, segmental demyelination is less common than axonal degeneration. Hypertrophic Neuropathy Recurrent segmental demyelination is a feature of a num-ber of chronic hereditary neuropathies, particularly Char-cot-Marie-Tooth disease, Dejerine--Sottas disease, and Refsum's disease. In such diseases, repeated segmental demyelination appears to be responsible for a florid proliferation of Schwann cells and the formation of "onion-bulb" whorls, giving a distinctive histologic picture of hypertrophic neu-ropathy to these peripheral neuropathies. So far, at least 30 causative genes have been identified for primary heritable demyelinating neuropathies therefore, although histopathologic analysis is still important for the diagnosis of HDN, it is gradually being replaced by molecular diagno-sis. Traumatic Lesions of Peripheral Nerve An understanding of the structure and staining reactions of normal peripheral nerve is essential for unraveling the complexities of traumatic lesions of nerve. Identification of cell types, recognition of patterns of organization, and the detection of normal elements within a traumatic lesion allow a more confident diagnosis and description to be for-mulated. ing early remyelination in an experimental animal. There are normal, large myelinated fibers with axons 8 to 10 IJ,min diameter and axons 3 to 51J,min diameter, which have thin myelin sheaths and are remyelinating. Myelin debris is seen in Schwann cells and macrophages. The 11J,m resin section is stained with toluidine blue. B.Nerve biopsy from a child with metachromatic leukodystrophy. Large axons with either thin myelin sheaths or with no myelin sheath at all are seen in the biopsy. Unmyelinated fibers are unaffected. The 1 IJ,mresin section is stained with toluidine blue. C.Hypertrophic neuropathy. Demyelinated and remyelinated axons are seen at the centers of onion-bulb whorls formed by Schwann cell processes. There is abundant endoneurial collagen. The 11J,mresin section is stained with toluidine blue and carbol fuchsin. D.Teased fibers. Normal fiber with a normal node of Ranvier. The fiber above has a thin, remyelinating segment on one side of the node and a normal segment on the other side. Osmium-stained teased fibers. (Reprinted from: Weller RO. Colour atlas of Neuropathology. Oxford: Oxford University Press and Harvey Miller; 1984with permission.) Amputation neuromas may develop as painful swellings at the distal ends of amputated limbs or at sites of nerve damage without amputation. They consist of disoriented bundles ofaxons surrounded by Schwann cells and divided into compartments by perineurial cells. In hematoxylin and eosin-stained paraffin sections, the tubular formation of the perineurial compartments can be recognized. By immunocy-tochemistry, axons can be stained with antibodies to neuro-filament protein and GAP 43; the Schwann cells associated with them contain S-100 protein and the perineurial cells are EMA, Glut-l and Claudin-l positive but do not contain S-100 protein. Silver stains can also be used to iden-tify the twisted and disoriented axons. The histologic picturereflects the processes seen in the normal regeneration of peripheral nerve, but in amputation neuromas, appropriate regeneration along the distal part of the nerve is prevented. In 1876 T.G. Morton, from Pennsylvania, described a neuroma that involves the plantar interdigital nerves, almost always between the third and fourth toes (Morton's metatarsalgia), and consists of small painful swellings on the nerves. Histologically, there is fibrosis and edema of the endoneurium and perineurium and the accumulation of mucosubstances similar to endoneurial glycosaminogly-cans. The detection ofaxons and Schwann cells by immu-nohistochemistry is often a useful adjunct to the diagnosis of this lesion. elinated and devoid of a myelin sheath. A small onion-bulb whorl has formed around this axon with the encirclement by Schwann cell pro-cesses, one of which contains an unmyelinated fiber. Thickly myelinated fibers are seen at the bottom of the picture. Electron micro-graph. A pseudocyst or nerve sheath ganglion, contammg mucinous material, that stains with alcian blue, may form on a peripheral nerve, generally at a site of repeated trauma. Although the fibrous capsule of the cyst and its mucinous contents may dominate the picture, damaged nerve com-ponents can usually be detected adjacent to the cyst. Compressive lesions of peripheral nerves have resulted in some debate regarding their origin. Because of the resem-blance of whorls within these lesions to those seen in hyper-trophic neuropathies, they have been labeled "localized hypertrophic neuropathy". Such lesions usually occur at sites of compression over the fibula or on the posterior interosseous nerve, although some lesions present with no obvious nerve compression. Although there is well-marked onion-bulb formation they are formed not by Schwann cells as in hypertrophic neuropathies but by perineurial cells. Such compressive lesions should not be confused with perineuromas in which immunocytochemistry has confirmed that the cell whorls are formed by EMA, Glut-l and Claudin-l-positive perineurial cells and there are abnormalities of chromosome 22. T.W Beer described in 2009 a series of cutaneous re-excision specimens containing concentric proliferation of perineruial cells around nerves in the dermis in intimateassociation with fibrosis and/or chronic inflammation. The term reparative perineurial hyperplasia was proposed for this phenomenon that may occur in certain fibrosis-associated or some traumatic conditions. Palisaded encapsulated neuroma, also known as "solitary circumscribed neuroma", described by Reed in 1972, has rather distinct clinical features. Typically, it presents as a small solitary nodule in the area of the face with no clinical features of neurofibromatosis or type II multiple endocrine neoplasia. This lesion is currently viewed as a form of true neuroma. Histologi-cally, PEN appears as one or more circumscribed nodules in the dermis, sometimes partially encapsulated by a delicate compact EMA-positive perineurial layer, and sometimes showing a plexiform or multinodular architecture. The process consists of a solid proliferation of tightly inter-woven fascicles of Schwann cells sometimes separated by narrow gaps that create a characteristic appearance of the lesion at low magnification. The Schwann cells are often arranged as palisades and there may be numerous axons scattered throughout the lesion, best demonstrated with Bodian silver stain or by immunohistochemistry for neuro-filament proteins. Tumors of the Peripheral Nervous System A variety of cells and structures may be identified in tumors of the peripheral nervous system; they include perineurial cells, Schwann cells, axons, and neurons. The diagnosis frequently depends on the histologic analysis of the tumor and thus the detection of cellular components forming the tumor and their relationship with normal nerve structures. Perineurioma is a rare true perineurial neoplasm. Perineuriomas can arise in a wide variety of sites and may exhibit different histologic patterns with extra and intra-neural forms. Histologically, intraneural perineu-riomas affect individual fascicles with concentric prolifera-tion of spindle cells around nerve fibers in the endoneurium; extraneural perineuriomas show paucicellular to cellular forms (with some cases showing dense collage-nization-sclerosing perineurioma) with proliferation of spindle cells with an extremely thin and elongated profile resembling normal perineurial cells. Perineurioma cells may show granular cell change. Malignant peri-neuriomas have also been rarely reported. The key diagnostic finding is that the proliferating cells are labeled with EMA, Glut-l and Claudin-l, but fail to stain for S-100 protein, neurofilaments and CO-34. Peri-neuriomas may be closely related to cutaneous meningioma since shared histologic features, and positive staining for vimentin and EMA in both conditions, suggest close simi-larities between these lesions. Schwannomas are tumors of peripheral nerves com-posed almost entirely of Schwann cells; interestingly however, axons may be focally found, chal-lenging the dogma concerning the absence of intra tumoral axons in schwannomas. Neoplastic Schwann cells may produce and respond to trophic factors, particularly to the growth-factor-like polypeptides known as neuregulins, in an autocrine and/or paracrine fashion to promote pro-liferation. In fact, the presence of neuregulins in certain schwannomas has been demonstrated by immunohisto-chemistry. Histologically, schwannomas form two basic patterns of cellular organization; compact areas with elongated cells and a less cellular loosely arranged area often with vacuolation and occasionally lipidization, described in 1920 by the Swedish neurologists by N. R.E Antoni and known as Antoni type A and Antoni type B patterns respectively. Neoplastic Schwann cells may exhibit different mor-phologies. Occasionally, the Schwann cells have an epithelioid appearance (epithe-lioid schwannomas), are surrounded by an abundant myxoid stroma have a high nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, exhibit a plexiform pattern, contain copi-ous melanin, or exhibit xan-thomatous change with many foamy cells containing oil red 0positive neutral lipid. Microcystic and neuroblastoma-like variants have also been described. Schwannomas usually grow on the sides of nerves and do not infiltrate nerve bundles. Thus, normal nerves may be seen within the fibrous capsule that is usu-ally present around schwannomas. Histologically, the tumor cells have elongated nuclei and long eosinophilic processes often forming palisades first described by the Uruguayan-born pathologist J.Verocay and known today as Verocay bodies. The palisades are parallel arrays of tumor nuclei separated by the eosinophilic PAS-positive, processes of Schwann cells. The basement mem-brane investing each Schwann cell in the tumor is well demonstrated by electron microscopy but can also be dem-onstrated in reticulin stains by light microscopy. Collagen bundles within schwannomas may have a distinc-tive long spaced appearance. Immuno-cytochemistry shows the presence of S-l 00 protein, CD 57, CD56, calretinin and Sox10 in schwannoma cells but they are negative for EMA. Schwannomas may also express transcription factors known to regulate normal Schwann cell development, such as FoxD3, Sox9 and Sox10. Some schwannomas associated with the spinal cord and those deep in the body or close to major joints stain by immunocytochemistry for GFAP while the superficial, subcutaneous schwannomas are negative. Schwann cells associated with unmyelinated fibers are more likely to express GFAP and it has been proposed that the GFAP-positive schwannomas may arise from unmyelinated nerves. Melanin may be seen in schwannomas and by electron microscopypremelanosomes and melanosomes may be iden-tified. Such structures emphasize the commonorigin of Schwann cells and melanocytes from the neural crest. There are two types of melanotic schwanno-mas. The conventional type is composed of plump spindle and epithelioid cells arranged in whorls and streaming fasci-cles containing melanin pigment. Psammomatous melanotic schwannomas are mainly in autonomic/visceral locations with the same cell arrangement as melanotic schwannomas but with the additional feature of PAS-positive, von Kossa-positive, mineralized laminated calcospherites. Approximately 50% of patients with psammomatous melanotic schwannomas may have evidence of Carney's complex that includes, primary pigmented nodular adre-nocortical disease, pituitary-independent, primary adrenal form of hypercortisolism, lentigines, ephelides and blue nevi of the skin and mucosae, and a variety of non-endocrine and endocrine tumors such as myxomas, pituitary adenomas, testicular Sertoli cell tumor and other benign and malignant neoplasms including tumors of thyroid and ductal adenomas of the breast. Granular cell tumor is a benign tumor of somewhat controversial histogenesis. A schwannian origin has been found to be the most accepted histogenesis. Granular cytoplasmic change, however, is the expression of a metabolic alteration occurring often, but not exclusively, in Schwann cells. The tumor cells have abundant granular cytoplasm and a small eccen-tric nucleus; they invade small nerve branches in the skin. Immunocytochemical studies have shown that the tumor cells, express S-100 protein, CD57, CD68, NSE, PGP 9.5, osteopontin and also occasionally express myelin (PO and P2) and myelin-associated proteins. Expres-sion of calretinin has been demonstrated in GCT. As this calcium-binding protein is typically expressed in neu-rons, ganglion cells and Schwann cells, GTC expression may further support a neuronal origin or differentiation of these tumors. Interestingly, calretinin positivity may be increased in the pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia of the squamous epithelium overlying the tumor cells seen in some cases of GCT that may indicate a role of calretinin in the interaction between GCT cells and hyperplastic epithe-lium. Granular cells have also been described in nerves undergoing wallerian degeneration. Neurofibromas are complex benign lesions frequently associated with neurofibromatosis. As dis-tinct from schwannomas, neurofibromas are diffuse lesions in the skin or around peripheral nerves that invade the peripheral nerve endoneurium and enlarge nerve branches. They also diffusely invade surrounding tis-sues and may cause bone destruction. Histologically, neu-rofibromas are as a rule not encapsulated and they contain a variety of cells that are associated with peripheral nerves; unlike schwannomas, neurofibromas are not predominantly composed of Schwann cells. Mast cells are frequently seen in the stroma and can be identified using toluidine blue or Giemsa or by anti-tryptase, CD 117 and calretinin immuno-histochemistry. Mast cells induce factor XIIIa-positive mas. A.Benign schwannoma, showing the typical biphasic appearance with Verocay bodies. B.Plexiform schwannoma. C.Cellular schwannoma with uniform fascicular growth pattern. D.Ancient schwannoma. E.Myxoid schwannoma. F.Granular cell schwannoma. Note the granular cells are originating from a nerve fascicle: Anti-S-l00 protein. fibroblast-like cells to synthesize a large amount of extracel-lular matrix in neurofibromas, and are one of the inflamma-tory cell types involved in tumor promotion. It has been hypothesized that when mast cells are lost, as seen in cases of MPNST, there may be a diminution of the anti-cancer effect of mast cells in maintaining the benign nature of some of these proliferations. By immunocy-tochemistry, S-100, and CD57-positive Schwann cells can be detected within neurofibromas, in addition to EMA, Glut-1, and Claudin-1-positive perineurial cells and CD34 endoneurial fibroblasts. Entrapped axons can be seen coursing through neurofibromas in immunocytochem-ical preparations for neurofilament protein, PGP 9.5 or in silver-stained sections. All of these cell components are set in a variable fibromyxoid stroma that in some cases may be so prominent that it may be mistaken for a myxoma or myxoid liposarcoma. Distorted structures resembling Wagner-Meissner or pacinian corpuscles are sometimes seen as well as mela-nin. Neurofibromatosis is an autosomal dominant disease that is part of the group of neurocutaneous disorders, col-lectively known as phakomatoses. It presents as G.Melanotic schwannoma. H.Epithelioid schwannoma. I. Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor with rhabdo-myoblastic differentiation Rhabdomyoblasts. two major diseases, peripheral (type I or von Recklinghau-sen's disease; NF1) and central. Both type I and type II are inherited as autosomal dominant traits but many cases are new mutations. Over 90% of cases of neurofibromatosis are type I; a gene defect has been located on the long arm of chromosome 17 and has been linked to the locus encoding nerve growth factor. There is an increase in NGF in the serum of patients with this disorder. The NFl suppres-sor gene which spans over 350 kb of genomic DNA and contains 60 exons, encodes a ubiquitous protein known as neurofibromin. This 2818 amino acid protein has been shown to be associated with cytoplasmic micro tubules and function as a GTPase, activating Ras proteins. A wide variety of disorders occur in patients with NF 1, including elephantiasis neuromatosa, in which there are redundant folds of skin associated with plexiform neurofi-bromas and, more commonly, multiple cutaneous neurofibromata. Other tumors such as gliomas, carcinoid tumors, pheochromocytomas, neuroblastomas, gastrointestinal stromal tumors, Wilms' tumors, and pig-mented hamartomas of the iris, are also seen in patients with this disorder. Central or type II neurofibromatosis is much less common than NF 1 and is characterized by bilateral vestib-ular schwannomas; skin lesions are uncommon. Approxi-mately 40% of the vestibular schwannomas in NF2 tend to have a lobular "grape-like" pattern, while this arrange-ment is extremely uncommon in sporadic schwannomas. A proportion of these patients have multi-ple tumors, including meningiomas, intramedullary spinal ependymomas and glial microhamartomas of the cerebral cortex. A gene deletion on chromosome 22q12 was identified in 1993 in patients with this disorder, and it is associated with abnormalities of glial growth factor and NGF activity. The NF2 gene spans 110 kb and encodes a membrane-cytoskeleton link-ing protein, member of the protein 4.1 family, known as merlin. Merlin, also known as schwannomin, may be detected by immu-nohistochemistry in the cytoplasm of many cells including Schwann cells, and it is believed to act as a tumor sup-pressor gene, the loss of function of which is a fundamen-tal event in the genesis of schwannomas. Normal Schwann cells express merlin that is known to playa cru-cial role in cytoskeleton-associated events. Since merlin is a tumor suppressor gene, and all schwannomas lack mer-lin, it is proposed that the mutation of NF2 may cause tumor formation through disruption of cell shape, cell matrix and cell-cell communication or signaling functions, attributed to actin cytoskeleton-plasma membrane inter-action. Sporadic schwannomas from non-NF2 individuals also have NF2 mutations. Interesting nerve sheath tumors showing features of both schwannoma and neurofibromas and schwannoma and perineurioma have recently been described. Neuronal tumors such as ganglioneuromas occur in association with autonomic ganglia in the peripheral ner-vous system. Histologically, neurons can be identified within these tumors; axons and Schwann cells may be identified by immunocytochemistry. Electron microscopy reveals the presence of 100 nm dense-core vesicles resem-bling catecholamine granules in the neurons. In addition to well-differentiated ganglioneuromas, primitive neuroec-todermal tumors such as neuroblastoma and ganglioneuro-blastomas arise within the abdomen and thorax. Cell types within the more primitive tumors may be dif-ficult to identify by immunocytochemistry but electron microscopy usually reveals the presence of 100 nm dense-core catecholamine vesicles within the tumor cell cyto-plasm. Schwannomatosis is a recently recognized distinct form of NF characterized by multiple non-ves-tibular schwannomas with no known constitutional NF-2 mutation. Some investigators have reported that both famil-ial and sporadic schwannomatosis may harbor mutations in the SAMRCB 1 gene. Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors are derived from spe-cialized cells of the endoneurium and penneunum and show great histologic variation and many similarities to other soft tissue tumors. The term MPNST incor-porates previously used terms such as neurofibrosarcoma and malignant schwannoma. Mutation in the NF 1 tumor suppressor gene is the most important molecular genetic event in the development of MPNST. Malignant change in a benign schwannoma is an extremely rare event, however two forms of neurofibroma, plexiform and localized intraneural neurofibroma, are significant precur-sors of MPNST. Immunocytochemistry has demon-strated S-100, EMA, Glut-I, PGP 9.5 and CD57-positive cells in MPNST and occasional tumors that are EMAlGlut-1 positive and S-IOO protein negative have been described as MPNST with perineurial cell differentia-tion. This suggests that cells of MPNST may produce proteins characteristic of perineurial cells or of both peri-neurium and Schwann cells. Heterogeneity is common and so histologic sampling should include wide areas of tumor. Unusual elements may be encountered occa-sionally such as cartilage, bone, squamous elements and muscle. MPNST may also present with malignant glands or rhabdomyosarcoma, features that may be highlighted by immunocytochemistry for cytokeratins and desmin, respectively. In an attempt to explain the occurrence of malignant muscle differentiation in malignant Schwannomas, Masson suggested that endoneurial cells might differentiate into muscle cells under the inductive influence of nerve cells, a situation that was thought to be operative in regenerating limbs in triton salamanders, hence the name "triton tumor" (Malignant schwannoma with rhabdomyoblastic differen-tiation).