The epidermis of newborns and children is usually of the same thickness as in adults, with the exception of the acral skin. There is a greater density of melanocytes and Langer-hans cells. The dermis is more cellular than in the adult with a higher concentration of ground substance. The number of eccrine glands is higher at birth, while apocrine glands are not well developed until after puberty. The sebaceous glands are developed in children, but sebaceous secretion begins at puberty under the influence of androgen stimulation. The adipocytes of the subcutaneous tissue in newborns and children are thin-walled and larger than the adult adi-pocytes. In addition to white fat as seen in adults, infants possess brown fat, which initially comprises up to 5% of body weight then diminishes with age to virtually disappear by adulthood. Brown adipocytes are rich in mitochondria and contain multiple lipid droplets of varying size in the cytoplasm with centrally located nuclei. Brown fat contains an abundance of blood-filled capillaries and is of particular importance in neonates because it has the ability to pro-duce heat by degrading fat molecules into fatty acids. In the elderly, the histologic differences are mainly due to atrophy and reduction of most cutaneous elements. The cells of the epidermis are arranged hap-hazardly because of aberrant proliferation of the basal celllayer, which may predispose to the development of neo-plasms. There is a marked decrease in the number of melanocytes and in the number of melanosomes, lead-ing to reduced pigmentation and, consequently, more exposure to the damaging effects of ultraviolet light. The Langerhans cells also decrease in number and function with advanced age, which increases the damaging effects of contactants and partially contributes to age-associated deterioration of immune function. In the elderly, the dermis is thinned, relatively acellu-lar, and avascular. The dermal collagen, elastin, and ground substance are altered and reduced. Elastic fibers show structural and biochemical alterations that change the elasticity of the skin. Collagen bundles are thicker but stiffer. The net effect is that age-associated alterations make the dermis less stretchable, less resilient, and prone to wrin-kling. Fibroblasts, dendritic cells, and mast cells are also reduced in number. Because of the reduction in the cutaneous vascular sup-ply, there is a decrease in inflammatory response, absorp-tion, and cutaneous clearance. Both eccrine and apocrine glands are also reduced, with diminished secretions in the elderly. Sebaceous glands increase in size and manifest clinically as sebaceous hyper-plasia, but paradoxically their secretory output is lessened by decreased activity. With age, the number and rate of growth of hair follicles decreases, vellus hairs will develop into terminal hairs in unusual sites, such as the ear, nose, and nostrils, resulting in possible cosmetic problems. There is also a decreased func-tioning of Meissner's and Vater-Pacini corpuscles. Finally, there is diminished subcutaneous tissue especially in the face, shins, hands, and feet, but it increases in other areas, particularly the abdomen in men and the thighs in women. The pathologic hallmark of extrinsic aging is solar elas-tosis, whereas wrinkling is due to the intrinsic factors mentioned previously. subcutaneous tissue. HISTOLOGIC VARIATIONS ACCORDING TO ANATOMIC SITES Regional variations of the normal histomorphology are important to recognize so as to avoid the misinterpretation of variation as abnormality. The normal scalp and other dense hair-containing regions show hair follicles extending through the dermis into the subcutaneous fat. This is usually not seen in areas with less concentration of hair. Abundant vel-Ius hair is seen in sections taken from the skin of the ear. The skin of the face shows characteristically many pilose-baceous units, and large sebaceous glands are seen on the nose. The squamous layer of the eyelid epidermis is thin and composed of two to three layers of cells and basaloid epi-thelial buds. Modified apocrine glands and vellus hairs are seen in the dermis. Sections taken from the skin of the trunk, especially the back, show a normally thickened reticular dermis when compared to other sites. Unawareness of this normal variation may lead to the erroneous diagnosis of pro-cesses producing thick collagen, such as scleroderma. The skin around the umbilicus also shows thick and fibrotic der-mis. The palms and soles contain stratum lucidum and show a thick, compact cornified layer with loss of the character-istic basket-weave pattern. In addition, there are numerous eccrine units, nerve end organs, and glomus structures seen in the dermis. There are no pilosebaceous units. Sections of the skin of the lower leg may show thicker blood vessels in the papillary dermis as a result of gravity and stasis. Smooth muscle fibers are seen in the dermis of the skin of external genitalia and areola of the nipple. Cutaneous-mucosal junctions may lack granular Skin of face with pilosebaceous units. dermis. layers and stratum lucidum. and cornified layers, and cells of the squamous layers are larger, with higher glycogen content. PATHOLOGIC CHANGES FOUND IN BIOPSIES AND INTERPRETED AS "NORMAL SKIN" Biopsies taken from clinically abnormal skin lesions may be interpreted histologically as normal because of the presence of subtle changes. The following are some examples. Dermatophytosis is seen in the cornified layer of an otherwise normal skin. A thick or absent granular layer may indicate an abnormal process of keratinization like psoriasis or blood vessels secondary to stasis. Superficial dermatophytosis jPAS stains). an ichthyosiform dermatosis. Vitiligo may give the histologic impression of normal skin unless one searches for melanocytes. Macular and lichen amyloidosis may be overlooked because the pink globules of amyloid seen in the papillary dermis can be mistaken for normal dermis. Urticaria produces only edema, which in routine sections is seen as separation of the colla-gen bundles in the dermis. Similar changes are seen in the case of dermal mucinosis, in which deposition of mucinous material may be inconspicuous in rou-tine sections. Special stains for mucin will be helpful. In telangiectasia macularis eruptive perstans, a sub-type of cutaneous mastocytosis, the changes may be quite subtle and are composed of dilated blood ves-sels in the upper dermis with a scant infiltrate of mast cells. The infiltrate must be confirmed with appropri-ate stains for mast cells. Trichotillomania is a hair pulling habit resulting in areas of alopecia. Although histologic changes can be numerous, at times hair follicles devoid of hair are the only changes seen, which give an impression of normal skin in the biopsy material. " melanocytes. papillary dermis. derma, can represent only as partial loss of elastic fibers in the dermis, which will be demonstrated by special stains of elastic tissue. The so-called "connective tissue nevus" represent-ing a hamartoma with an overproduction of collagen bundles and increased, normal or decreased elastic tissue in the dermis is another condition that can be erroneously interpreted as normal skin. Other conditions that might be missed as "normal skin" include cafe-au-lair spots, cutis laxa, myxo-edema, scleromyxedema, and more. Therefore, the clinical information combined with careful histologic examination, sometimes special stains, or immunohistochemical studies of the biopsy material is crucial to avoid misinterpretation of skin disorders as normal tissue.