The term "bone" refers to a specialized type of mesenchymal tissue or to structures composed of bone tissue. Bone tissue along with cartilage, fibrous tissue, fat, blood vessels, nerves, and hematopoietic elements form the individual bones. In humans, there are 206 separate bones, which together with their articulations form the skeleton. Anatomically, the skeleton can be divided into the axial skeleton, which includes the skull, vertebral column, ribs, sternum, and hyoid, and the peripheral skeleton, which consists of the upper and lower limbs and the pelvis. The acral skeleton refers to the bones of the hands and feet. Bone, whether referring to an organ or a type of con-nective tissue, is a unique biphasic blend of organic and inorganic elements. Developing and adult bones have a distinct gross appearance due to a hierarchi-cal structure composed of a mineral-ized organic matrix, deposited in a woven or lamellar pattern, and cells that in combination are arranged into compact or trabecular bone. The ultimate quality, quantity, and architecture of these components confer important biologic properties which are influenced by the mechanical function of the bone. The contributions of bone to mineral homeostasis, primarily calcium and phospho-BONE-THE TISSUE: ORGANIC AND INORGANIC COMPONENTS 93 Organic Components 93 Inorganic Components 96 BONE FORMATION, GROWTH, AND REMODELING 97 Endochondral Ossification 97 Intramembranous Ossification 103 Modeling and Remodeling 103 REFERENCES 105 rous homeostasis, are vital to life, and the structural characteristics of bone are essential to locomotion, acting as levers for muscle action, and organ protec-tion. In addition, bones form the framework of our bodies, thereby giving it size and shape and provide a nurturing storehouse for the hematopoietic ele-ments. Lastly, the cells of bone have been shown to play an important role in energy metabolism, the renal excretion of phosphate and male development and maturation. Accordingly, bones have four basic functions:storage for elements and minerals, mechanical structures for movement and protection of viscera, a home for hematopoietic tissue, andan endocrine organ that helps regulate important biologic processes. BONE-THE ORGAN: GROSS AND MICROSCOPIC ANATOMY Bones are rigid, lightweight, usually cylin-drical structures, that have a relatively high tensile strength. Tan-white and smooth-surfaced, they are the hardest and strongest structures of the body, being as strong as cast iron but one-third of the weight as a result of their unique structure. Bones are reinforced, asymmetric, hollow struc-tures designed to provide a maximum strength-to-weight ratio. , ' I!U'I FOR'1 \ ( J(Y, and sizes of bones, as well as their method of formation. Individual bones are classified according to their size and shape. There are bones that are flat, those that are cuboid, and the most common group are bones that are tubular, both long and short. Tubular bones are further subdivided anatomically along their long axis into the epiphysis, the metaphysis, and the diaphysis. The of bone. Gross. A cross section of the head and upper diaphysis of a macerated femur with the soft tissue removed. The cortex of the metaphasis and diaphysis is of varying thickness depending upon the stress place upon the bone. The trabeculae of the head follow the lines of stress. Microarchitecture. The cross-linking of the trabeculae demonstrated by micro CT. Histology. A microscopic section of the compact bone of the cortex showing haversian systems and circ-umferential and interstitial lamellae. Matrix. Bundles of collagen fibers by scanning electron microscopy of two macerated areas of bone in which the mineral has been removed. Cell. An electron micrograph of an osteoclast on the surface of a trabeculua. Supplied by ML Bauxstein, PhD. Department of Orthopaedics, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston MA.Grossepiphysis extends from the base of the articular surface to the point where significant narrowing of the bone diameter begins. During development a secondary center of ossification is often formed in the epiphysis. The metaphysis is the por-tion of the bone in which there is a significant decrease in the bone diameter. The diaphysis or shaft extends from the base of one metaphysis (the point where decrease in bone diameter ceases) to the base of the opposing metaphysis. In immature or growing bone the metaphysis is composed largely of a cartilaginous growth plate. Apophyses are growth sites, such as the greater and lesser trochanters of the femur, and are protuberances that form at large tendoliga-mentous insertion sites. These are present in the cartilaginous anlage, have physes and form bone in the same manner as the major physeal plates of the long bones. The medical and forensic determination of skeletal age and the prediction of ultimate growth utilize the amount and localization of bone ossification, the degree of maturation of the physes, the for-mulation and size of the secondary ossification centers, and the degree and amount of remodeling. Despite their differences in size and shape, all bones are of similar composition and generally have a periosteum and an endosteum on the cortex, a cortex composed of compact bone, and a medullary canal that contains vari-able amounts of cancellous bone with fatty and hematopoietic marrow, blood vessels, and nerves. For any given bone, the quantity and arrangement Microarchitecture Histology Matrix Cell The cortex defines the outer limits of the bone and is thickest along the medial surface Ueft) of the neck and diaphysis, where load bearing is greatest. The medullary cavity is filled with bony trabeculae and red hematopoietic and yellow fatty marrow. The trabeculae are aligned along the lines of stress; this is especially prominent in the medial portion. The horizontal line at the base of the head on the x-ray represents the accrual of bone that occurred during closure of the epiphyseal growth plate. of cortical and cancellous bone is directly related to the bio-mechanical requirements. For instance, bones exposed to the largest torsional and load-bearing forces are usually long bones, and those that serve a protective func-Femur MetaphysiS Growth plate Eplphysls {Patella patella prior to the formation of the secondary centers of ossification. The long bone is composed of the proximal and distal epiphyses, metaphyses and growth plates, and the intervening diaphysis.tion are composed roughly of 80 to 100% cortical bone and oto 20% cancellous bone. In contrast, bones that predomi-nately transmit weight-bearing forces, such as the vertebral bodies, consist of 80% cancellous bone and 20% cortical bone. Wolff's law also applies to the trabeculae of cancel-lous bones in that they are arranged according to the lines of stress to which they are exposed in their biomechanical environment. Woven and Lamellar Bone Histologically, bone tissue, regardless of whether it is corti-calor cancellous, normal or part of a pathologic process, is categorized into woven and lamellar types on the basis of the organization of its type I collagen fibers which are the major structural proteins of bone tissue. In woven bone, the collagen fibers are arranged in a seemingly haphazard felt-work, while in lamellar bone they are deposited in parallel arrays either longitudinally or cir-cumferentially around haversian canals forming osteons or haversian systems. Woven bone is fabricated during periods of rapid bone growth or formation. It composes parts of both the cortex and the trabeculae of the developing bony skeleton during embryo-genesis and portions of bones in the growing infant and the adolescent. It may also be the predominant type of bone that is formed in various reactive (fracture-callus, infection-invo-lucrum) and neoplastic (Codman's triangle, matrix of bone-forming neoplasms) conditions. Woven bone is hypercellular, and the osteocytes and their lacunae are large and appear to H&E-stained slide and with polarized light (rigM. The collagen fibers are oriented in all planes. There are many plump osteocytes, and their long axes appear randomly oriented, following the direction of the neighboring collagen fibers. be distributed in a haphazard fashion as the long axes of the cells parallel the random orientation of the neighboring col-lagen fibers. The mineral content of woven bone is higher than that of lamellar bone, and more than 50% of it is deposited outside of the collagen fibers. Overall, this struc-tural organization enables woven bone to resist forces equally in all directions and facilitates rapid formation, mineraliza-tion, and resorption. These factors explain why woven bone is weaker, less rigid, and more flexible than lamellar bone. Normally, the entire mature skeleton is composed solely of lamellar bone. Lamellar bone, in contrast to woven bone, is synthesized more slowly, is less cellular, and the polarization. The collagen fibers are arranged in parallel arrays. There are comparatively fewer osteocytes, and they oriented in the same direction as the collagen fibers.osteocytes and their lacunae are smaller and distributed in a more organized fashion along the more regular collagen lamellae. In addition, the process of miner-alization of lamellar bone differs from that of woven bone in that it occurs more slowly and continues long after the organic matrix is initially deposited. Furthermore, the min-eral deposits are localized almost exclusively within the col-lagen fibers and are first deposited within the spaces, or "hole regions," between the ends of adjacent collagen fibers. Subsequently, the mineral content increases as a result of enlargement and increase in the number of the apatite crystals. Microradiographs of un demineralized sec-tions reveal varying densities, with the oldest bone being most heavily mineralized. Since the mineral and collagen fibers are well organized and intimately bound to one another, lamellar bone has greater rigidity and tensile strength and less elasticity than woven bone. Both lamellar and woven bones are made by osteoblasts in discrete quantities or units. Osteoblasts first synthesize and secrete a layer of unmineralized type I collagen (oste-oid) on a surface of mineralized cartilage, previously formed bone, or collagen, and then regulate its mineralization. When adult lamellar bone is replaced the new bone is fastened to the old bone by cement or reversal lines. Cement lines manifest as thin and intensely basophilic linear structures on conventional hematoxylin and eosin histologic slides. Comparatively little is known about their structure or biochemistry, however evidence suggests that they are composed of areas of mineral rich collagen, and that they are richer in sulfur than is the surrounding bone matrix. Some investigators have suggested that cement lines represent a residuum of mineralized "ground substance" There are various degrees of mineralization, with the radiolucent areas being the most recently deposited and least mineralized. The radiodense portions represent the oldest areas of formation and the most mineralized. that is secreted during the initial reversal phase in the for-mation of new bone. Cortical Bone Cortical bone, also known as dense compact bone, is hard and tan-white. Its thickness depends on its location and mechanical requirements, being thickest in Photograph of a longitudinal section through a flat bone. The inner cortex is tan-white and solid. The round hole within it represents the pathway of the nutrient artery. The red area is the central bone marrow. areas exposed to large torsional and weight-bearing forces, such as the medial region of the mid-diaphysis of the femur, and thinnest where the transmission of weight-bearing and torsional forces are smallest, as seen adjacent to articular surfaces and within vertebral bodies. During the early stages of growth and development, cortical bone is constructed entirely of woven bone. Over time, it is gradually remodeled until in the mature skel-eton it is composed of pure lamellar bone. Adult cortical bone is composed of four different architectural patterns of lamellar bone: circumferential, concentric, and interstitial. The circumferential lamellae form outer and circumferential lamellae are beneath the periosteum, the concentric lamellae surround the haversian canals containing blood vessels, and the interstitial lamellae fills the intervening spaces. central canal, blood vessels, and surrounding concentric lamellae. Empty lacunae are seen in areas of the interstitial lamellae. inner envelopes to the cortex and consist of several subperi-osteal and endosteal layers that are oriented parallel to the long axis of the bone. They are the first cortical lamellae to be deposited, and in young individuals comprise almost the entire cortex. As mechanical stresses on the bone increase with age, many of the circumferential lamellae (except for several lamellae just beneath the periosteum and along the endosteum) are replaced by the concentric lamellae of the haversian systems. Haversian systems, or osteons, are created by osteo-clastic resorption of the circumferential lamellae that usu-ally begins on the endosteal surface of the cortex, and less frequently on the periosteal surface. The bone resorption proceeds perpendicular or at an angle to the long axis of the bone forming a canal . The numerous osteoclasts situated in the leading edge of the canal are known as the "cutting cone," and the cortical bone. The arrow points to a Volkmann's canal arising from the endosteum. Canaliculi connect the lacunae in adjacent circumferential lamellae. (This slide was prepared by Glimcher MJ, Roth SI, Schiller AL, as part of a course in Pathophysiology of Bone for the Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.) A forming Volkmann's canal coursing through the cortex of the bone. The canal is angled with respect to the bone lamellae and is filled with connective tissue. Osteoid and osteoblasts, indicating new bone formation, are present around the endosteal opening of the canal, but none are seen in the canal. The cortex shows circumferential lamellar bone with regularly placed osteocytes (Undemineralized bone section). in vivo, with tetracycline. A layer of tetracycline appears at the mineralization front of the haversian system where new bone is being formed. The osteocyte lacunae and the canaliculi of their connecting dendritic processes are visible as bright green areas. The lacunae of the adjacent interstitial regions do not connect with the haversian cells surrounding the haversian canal (dark area right center). of two adjacent osteocytes in the bone and an intra osseous osteocyte connecting with an osteoblast on the bone surface. Osteocyte cell processes pass through the canalicular network. The images are scanning electron micrographs of resin embedded acid etched mouse bone samples. With permission of Bonewald LF.Generation and function of osteocyte dendritic processes. JMusculoskelet Neuronal Interact 2005;5:321-324. canal they generate becomes filled with vessels, nerves, and mesenchymal cells enmeshed in a loose connective tissue stroma. Within a short distance, the osteoclastic activity becomes concentrated on one side of the canal; and, as a consequence, the direction of the newly formed canal becomes aligned with the long axis of the bone. The burrowing osteoclasts elongate the canal, and in their wake newly formed osteoblasts deposit lamellae of bone in a target-like, or concentric, fashion. The collagen fibers in anyone lamella are oriented parallel to each other; however, their pitch is slightly different from those in adjacent lamellae, and this enhances the biome-chanical strength of the cortex. The accrual of concentric lamellae over time reduces the diameter of the haversian canal so that in the end it is small and contains nutritional blood vessels and nerve twigs. Together, these elements define a haversian or osteonal system. Mature haversian canals are long and cylindrical, range from 25 to 125 urn in diameter, and are widest nearest the medullary cavity They form an intricate, branching, spiraling, and interconnecting network that courses throughout the cortex. The number of haversian systems in a particular bone is variable and is determined by age, the amount of mechanical stress and weight that the bone is subjected to over time, and other biologic and genetic factors. Individual haversian systems are relatively self-con-tained metabolic units because nutritional support of their cells, especially the bone cells, depends upon the process of diffusion from their central vessels. Consequently, osteo-cyte viability is not sustainable beyond a certain distance from the vessels, which imposes a biologic limit on the maximal number of lamellae contained within any haver-sian system. Also, the integrated network of osteocytes is generally limited to the osteon within which it develops, as osteocytic cytoplasmic processes usually contact only those that dwell in the same system. The bone filling the spaces between the haversian sys-tems is known as interstitial bone. The interstitial lamellae represent the remnants of circumferential lamellae of pre-viously formed haversian systems that have become par-tially destroyed by osteoclastic activity. They are irregular, geometric-shaped units of lamellar bone that help "glue," or anneal haversian systems to one another-this arrangement is important in maintaining corti-cal integrity. The osteocytes confined to the interstitiallamel-lae may lose their access to nutritional sources and conse-quently undergo necrosis, leaving behind empty lacunae. Cement lines denote the physical boundaries of every haversian system and unit of interstitial bone. As the bone ages and is subject to varying forces and remodeling, more haversian systems develop which replace pre-existing inter-stitial lamellae and older haversian systems which subse-quently become newly created interstitial lamellae. The endosteum is the loose areolar connective tissue that immediately abuts the osteoblasts along the inner sur-face of the cortex and along the medullary surfaces of the trabeculae. Cancellous Bone Cancellous bone, also known as trabecular or spongy bone is tan-white and fenestrated, and is located within the med-ullary cavity. It is composed of intercon-necting plates and struts of trabecular bone. In the adult, it is the fourth type of lamellar bone with the lamellae oriented parallel to the long axis of a trabecula. collagen lamellae are oriented parallel to the long axis of the trabecula. In developing bone, it is composed of significant amounts of woven bone; and, when initially formed in infants and children, and reparative bone containing cartilage, it con-tains a central core of calcified cartilage (primary spongi-osa). Enlargement of trabeculae occurs via the process of appositional growth which means that newly formed bone is deposited on pre-existing trabecular surfaces. Adult can-cellous bone is lamellar and it is oriented in relation to lines of mechanical stress to provide support and distribute large weight-bearing forces along a variety of dif-ferent pathways. Accordingly, cancellous bone is most abundant in the weight-bearing ends of bones, such as the epiphyses and vertebral bodies, and is present in only small amounts in the mid-diaphysis of tubular bones. Small trabeculae are avascular, while larger ones may contain small haversian-like systems, including concentric lamel-lae. The surfaces of mature trabeculae are typically lined by quiescent osteoblasts or surface-lining cells and adjacent endosteal connective tissue. lamellar bone. Gross photograph of a macerated portion of cancellous bone. The trabeculae are forming interconnecting plates. In three dimensions, the trabeculae are usually inter-connecting plates and its global surface area is very large, which facilitates remodeling and the ability of the skeleton to rapidly respond to the metabolic demands of the body. The mature trabeculae are heavily mineralized with a thin layer of osteoid beneath the rela-tively inactive flattened osteoblasts. Periosteum The periosteum consists of a thin layer of tan-white connec-tive tissue that covers the outer surface of all cortices. In children it is relatively loosely attached, whereas in adults it is firmly anchored to the bone. In children, the perios-teum is constructed of an outer fibrous layer and an inner cellular layer. The cambium layer is composed of spindle-shaped fibroblasts and osteoprogenitor cells and mature polyhedral osteoblasts. Generally, the number of osteoprogenitor cells present depends on the age of the individual and the amount of bone cell activity in any particular region; they are especially numerous during periods of active bone formation. In contrast, in adults the periosteum appears largely as a fibrous layer. The fibrous layer contains fibroblasts and broad collagen fibers that are continuous with those of the joint capsule, tendons, and muscle fascia. At tendoligamentous insertion sites, the col-lagen fibers of the tendoligamentous structure pierce the periosteum and become anchored in the bone (Sharpey's fibers). Vascular Supply and Innervation Bones are vascular organs and receive their blood supply from three main sources: large nutrient arteries (one to two per bone), metaphyseal and epiphyseal vessels, and periosteal vessels. Nutrient arteries enter long bones in the diaphysis, traverse the cortex through foramina, and divide into ascending and descending branches within the medullary cavity. Smaller branch arteries, arterioles, capil-laries, venules, and veins course throughout of thick bundles of horizontally oriented collagen fibers. The inner cellular cambium layer contains spindle-shaped, osteoprogenitor cells. The maturing osteoblasts steadily become more polyhedral and acquire increasing amounts of amphophilic cytoplasm. A portion of intramembranous woven bone is seen forming the new cortex. The hematoxylin positive area staining blue is mineralized, while the pink area above is unmineralized osteoid. the medullary cavity, nourish the fatty and hematopoietic marrow, and extend into haversian canals, where they sup-ply the inner two-thirds of the cortex. At the ends of grow-ing bones, they terminate as small arteries that give rise to capillary loops at the bases of epiphyseal growth plates. The nerves in an area of fatty marrow.epiphyseal and metaphyseal vessels access bone through small apertures and provide blood flow to regions of the epiphysis and metaphysis in the mature skeleton and to the secondary centers of ossification during active endochon-dral ossification. The periosteal vessels are small and are believed to nourish the outer third of the cortex. The venous drainage system of bone is composed of medullary sinusoids that empty into a central venous sinus, which merges with nutrient veins. Bones are innervated largely by nonmyelinated nerves that are derived from the autonomic nervous system, and their function is to control blood flow. Larger nerve branches are usually associated with arterial vessels , whereas small groups of fibers can be found adjacent to vessels in haversian systems. Nerves supplying the peri-osteum contain sensory elements and are the source of the sensation of bone pain. BONE-THE TISSUE: ORGANIC AND INORGANIC COMPONENTS The special biphasic amalgamation of organic and inor-ganic materials found in bone distinguishes it from all other tissues in the body. The organic component con-sists of proteins and bone cells, and the inorganic element is a specialized, calcium-poor form of apatite, resembling hydroxyapatite [CalO62] in which the hydroxyl residues are replaced by phosphate and carbonate ions. The integration of the mineral phase with the organic matrix provides bone with hardness, strength, and limited elasticity. Organic Components Proteins The organic component accounts for approximately 35% of the wet weight of bone; and, of this, collagen is respon-sible for 90%. Collagen is the primary structural protein of bone, is derived from osteoblasts, and the overwhelm-ing majority is type I; type V collagen is present in much smaller amounts, and there are only trace quanti-ties of collagens III, XI, and XIII. Type III collagen may be increased in pathologic conditions. The numerous large type I collagen molecules are produced by osteoblasts; aside from their contribution to structural support, they also anchor many of the other constituents. The noncollagenous proteins are grouped according to their function as adhesion proteins, calcium-binding pro-teins, mineralization proteins, enzymes, cytokines, growth factors, and receptors. These proteins mediate all aspects of bone cell activity and are extremely important to the biologic success of bone as a tissue. Many of these substances are synthesized and secreted by osteoblasts, and others are derived and concentrated from the serum. An important osteoblast-produced noncollagenous protein is osteocalcin, which functions as a hormone that is involved in the regulation of glucose and insulin metabolism as well as male development and fertility. Osteocalcin is made solely by osteoblasts, and its quantification in serum has made it an important clinical marker of bone turnover. Osteoprogenitor Cells Osteoprogenitor cells are derived from tissue-bound mesen-chymal stem cells. These mesenchymal stem cells also have the capability to form adipocytes, chondrocytes, myocytes, and fibroblasts. The mesenchymal stem cells are located in the peri-anlage tissue of fetuses, the periosteum, the haversian systems, and Volkmann's and medullary canals. Osteoprogenitor cells are primitive committed mesenchy-mal cells that have the capacity to produce only osteoblasts. The process of osteoblast differentiation and maturation is complex and involves a variety of different factors including Runx2, Osterix and Wnt signaling. By light micros-copy, osteoprogenitor cells appear as generic spindle cells and do not have any distinguishing morphologic features; therefore, they cannot be identified with certainty in ordi-nary histologic sections, except by immunohistochemisty. Since bone can be formed in skin, soft tissue, muscle, and viscera in both experimental and pathologic conditions, osteoprogenitor cells or induc-ible stem cells are likely present in these sites as well. Osteoblasts Osteoblasts are vital to bone tissue and are the cells respon-sible for the production, transport, and arrangement of most of the components of the organic matrix. In addition, they initiate and regulate matrix mineraliza-tion and use autocrine and paracrine mechanisms to con-trol the activity of neighboring osteoblasts, osteocytes, and osteoclasts. Immunohistochemical and bio-chemical studies reveal the presence of alkaline phospha-tase, osteopontin, and osteocalcin within their cytoplasm, woven bone. Some osteoblasts are in various stages of being surrounded by matrix and becoming osteocytes. Spindle cells in the connective tissue adjacentto the trabecula may represent osteoprogenitor cells. Metabolically active osteoblasts forming lamellar bone. The thin layer of osteoid cannot be identified in these demineralized sections. At the right of the micrograph, the osteoblasts are becoming inactive, flattening, and being incorporated into the bone as osteocytes. The osteocytes of the lamellar bone are spindle-shaped. The dendrites are identifiable extending from the osteoblast bodies into the bone. RANKL, in their cyto-plasm and cell membranes and receptors for parathyroid hormone, prostaglandins, vitamin °3,estrogens, and cytokines on their cell membranes. Osteoblasts cover all bone surfaces and their lifes-pan may range from months to many years. Their meta-bolic state is closely related to their morphology; they are spindle-shaped when quiescent and large and polyhedral when rapidly producing bone. Metabolically active osteo-blasts vary in size from 10 to 80 11m and have abundant amphophilic to basophilic cytoplasm that is in intimate contact with the bone . Multiple cytoplasmic processes extend from the cells into and through the bone, contacting adjacent osteoblasts and osteocytes via nexus junc-tions. The nuclei of active osteoblasts are polarized away from the matrix surface and often have a conspicuous nucleolus and a prominent perinuclear halo that repre-sents a well-developed Golgi apparatus. The cells flatten and elongate as their synthetic activity diminishes and ultimately they remain as a cellular lining of the bone surfaces. Ultrastructurally, the cytoplasm of productive osteo-blasts contains extensive, granular endoplasmic reticulum, a large prominent Golgi apparatus, and numerous mito-chondria and lysosomes. In contrast, the cytoplasm of inactive osteoblasts resembles that of quiescent fibroblasts. Osteocytes Osteoblasts enveloped by matrix become osteocytes, and their half-life is estimated to be as long as 25 years. In adult bone, greater than 90 to 95% of bone cells are processes course through the matrix and contact those of neighboring osteocytes. osteocytes. The cell body, nucleus, and surrounding scant cytoplasm reside within a lacunar space. The nuclei are comparatively small and are not always visible in every plane of section; therefore, in most slides of bone tissue, random lacunae appear empty. Osteocytes have numerous long and delicate cytoplasmic processes, simi-lar to the neuritic processes of neurons ,4.13,4.14,4.22). These cell processes traverse the matrix through small tunnels termed canaliculi and provide a very large surface area of contact between the osteocyte and the matrix and extracellular fluid that bathes each cell. Osteocyte cell processes connect to those of neigh-boring osteocytes and to surface osteoblasts via gap junc-tions. Gap junctions facilitate the transfer of small mol-ecules and biologically generated electrical potentials from cell to cell. In this manner, osteocytes communicate with one another and form a complex and integrated network throughout bone tissue. Osteocytes are thought to func-tion as sensor cells in bone that can mediate the effects of mechanical loading through their extensive communica-tion network. The number, size, shape, and position of osteocytes vary according to the type of bone they inhabit. In woven bone, they are numerous, large, and plump. Their arrangement appears disorganized because their long axes parallel the direction of the neighboring collagen fibers, which in sections of woven bone appears random. In lamel-lar bone, osteocytes are comparatively fewer in number, smaller, more spindle-shaped, and appear in sections to be more regularly organized because the cells are oriented in the same direction as the surrounding lamellae. The repertoire of biologic activity possessed by osteo-cytes helps them maintain bone tissue and allows bone to be responsive to the mechanical and metabolic demands of the body. As mechanosensory cells they translate mechanical forces into biologic activity. The detection of physi-cal forces stimulates osteocytes to produce and release inter-cellular messengers that target precursor cells, osteoblasts,and osteoclasts. These cells, in turn, respond by remodeling the bone regionally and allowing it to change its mass and structure according to demands of the external physical environment. The widespread distri-bution of osteocytes and their cell processes is fundamental to another important role of theirs, namely, mineral homeo-stasis. Osteocytes generate and respond to microfluxes in ion concentrations and mediate the exchange of calcium and other ions between the bone matrix and extracellular fluid. In certain conditions, they may even be able to rap-idly release calcium and phosphorus from the mineralized matrix by a process termed osteocytic osteolysis, which mani-fests histologically as enlarged lacunar spaces. In addi-tion, osteocytes produce fibroblast growth factor-23, which is a hormone essential in the regulation of serum phospho-rus by modulating the reabsorption of phosphorus in the renal tubule. Osteoclasts Osteoclasts are terminally differentiated, multinucleated cells responsible for bone resorption. They are mobile effec-tor cells that have a lifespan of only several weeks. By the time they are recognizable by light microscopy; they are mature and biologically active and can be found residing within resorption pits produced by their digestion of mineralized bone matrix. Osteoclasts are 40 to 100 11min diameter and are polar-ized with one portion of the cell membrane intimately attached to the bone and the remainder exposed to the extracellular fluid in its microenvironment. The segment of cell membrane that actually adheres or seals to bone is laden with aV~3 integrins. The integrins bind to specific extracellular bone matrix proteins (vitronectin, osteopontin, and bone sialoprotein) previously deposited by osteoblasts, and in this manner the osteoclast can anchor to the bone surface. A network of interconnecting actin filaments that produces a clear area in the cytoplasm links the sealing zone of the osteoclast cell membrane to the nuclei. On aver-age, osteoclasts have 4 to 20 nuclei, though the number may range from 2 to as many as 100. In normal circum-stances, however, the amount is usually not greater than 12. The nuclei and adjacent prominent Colgi apparatus tend to congregate away from the bone-resorbing surface, and are surrounded by abundant amphophilic cytoplasm. The cytoplasm in the vicinity of the resorbing surface is rich in tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase, carbonic anhy-drase, and membrane-bound lysosomes. The adjacent cell membrane, which also directly apposes the bone-resorbing surface, has numerous finger-like extensions that effectively increase its surface area and form the so-called brush border. The lysosomes fuse with the brush border and release their contents into the resorption pit, which begins the actual process of bone digestion. Metabolic activation of osteoclasts is initiated by anchorage, and this process gen-erates a stimulatory signal that is transmitted to the nuclei by the actin network. The nuclei, now activated, orchestrate the complex and transitory cytoplasmic and cell membrane modifications required for bone digestion. Importantly, mineralized bone or cartilage is more efficiently resorbed by osteoclasts than is nonmineralized bone or cartilage. Focal, or partial, demineralization of collagen fibers appears to be one of the first steps in matrix resorption and is followed by catabolism of noncollagenous proteins and, lastly, the degradation of collagen fibers themselves. Once osteoclast activity ceases and the cell moves to another targeted site, macrophages meander into the base of the resorption pit and phagocytize the organic remnants. Osteoclasts are derived from mononuclear, hemato-poietic progenitor cells of the granulocytic-macrophage colony-forming and macrophage colony-form-ing units. The mononuclear preosteo-clasts undergo primary fusion to form multinucleated osteo-clasts, which are capable of acquiring and shedding nuclei throughout their short lifespan. A variety of cytokines and growth factors are critical to their development, maturation, and activity and include interleukin-l, IL-3, IL-6, IL-11, tumor necrosis factor, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and macrophage col-ony-stimulating factor. These factors work by either stimulating osteoclast progenitor cells or partici-pating in a paracrine system in which osteoblasts and mar-row stromal cells playa central role. This system is essential to bone metabolism, and its mediators include the molecules RANK (receptor activator for nuclear factor K~), RANK ligand, and osteo-protegerin. RANK is a member of the TNF fam-ily of receptors expressed mainly on cells of macrophage/ monocytic lineage, such as preosteoclasts. When this recep-tor binds its specific ligand through cell-to-cell con-tact, a series of signal cascades are activated and osteoclas-togenesis is initiated. RANKL is produced by and expressed on the cell membranes of osteoblasts and marrow stromal cells. Its expression may be influenced by other osteotropic factors, and its major role in bone metabolism is stimula-tion of osteoclast formation, differentiation, activation, and survival. The actions of RANKL can be blocked by another member of the TNF family of receptors, OPC, which is a soluble protein produced by a number of tissues, including bone, hematopoietic marrow cells, and immune cells. OPC inhibits osteoclastogenesis by acting as a decoy receptor that binds to RANKL, thus preventing the interaction of RANK with RANKL. The interplay between bone cells and these molecules permits osteoblasts and stromal cells to control osteoclast development. This ensures the tight coupling of bone formation and resorption vital to the success of the skeletal system and provides a mechanism for a wide variety of biologic mediators (hormones, cytokines, and growth fac-tors) to influence the homeostasis of bone tissue. Inorganic Components Mineral The primary mature inorganic mineral of bone is a calcium deficient variant of hydroxyapatite [CalO62], in which the hydroxyl groups have been largely replaced by phosphate and carbonate groups. There is minimal water in the mature crystals. It is the body's major res-ervoir for calcium and phosphate and contains more than 99% of the body's calcium and 85% of the body's phospho-rus Also harbored within the bone crystals are 95% of the body's sodium, 50% of the body's magnesium, and trace amounts of other essential minerals. The process of mineralization varies according to the type of tissue. In cartilage and possibly woven bone, it begins with the production of numerous small vesicles (matrix ves-icles) derived from chondroblasts and osteoblasts. The matrix vesicles are 2 to 4 urn in diameter and are the sites where mineral is first observed. Although there is some uncertainty regarding the initial structure and composition of the mineral, crystals of hydroxyapatite, as well as amor-phous calcium phosphate and brushite have been identified. The primary crystals serve as a nidus for the depo-sition of larger aggregates, which are then deposited in and around the collagen fibers. In lamellar bone, the process of mineralization is con-trolled by osteoblasts. The regulatory steps are complex and incompletely understood, though numerous proteins, growth factors, and cytokines are involved. Min-eralization begins with the deposition of mineral in the spaces between the ends of adjacent collagen molecules. It is still unclear whether the first deposits are hydroxyapatite, amorphous calcium phosphate, or a non-apatite crystalline calcium phosphate (octocalcium phos-phate, [CaS2P04)4-5H20]). Regardless of their initial form, the aggregates grow and form crystalline bone apatite. Initially, the crystals are situated within the col-lagen fibrils, but eventually they also develop outside the fibrils and fibers The shapes of the mature crystals are not known with certainty. High resolution transmission electron microscopy shows that they have the features of thin nanoplates, whereas, studies with small-angle x-ray scattering suggest that they are needle-like. Once the crystals are deposited in bone, they remain there for days to years, only to be dissolved at a future time during bone resorption, when the calcium and phosphorous are released into the extracellular fluid and become available for other biologic activities. Initial mineralization of osseous organic matrix takes approximately 2 weeks, therefore, the surfaces of bone are covered by a layer of unmineralized bone, called osteoid (Fig-ures 4.12, 4.20, 4.21). The width of this layer is dependent on the relative rate of bone formation. In inactive regions, the bone is nearly fully mineralized and is covered by a thin osteoid seam, whereas, in foci of rapid bone deposition, the osteoid layer may be more than several times thicker. The actual zone of mineralization can be detected by the systemic administration of the antibiotic tetracycline, which binds to the bone at the mineralization front and can be visualized with fluorescent microscopy. Complete mineralization of lamellar bone is a slow process requiring weeks to months. BONE FORMATION, GROWTH, AND REMODELING From the time that skeleton formation begins in the embryo until the stage that adult stature is attained, the bones of the body undergo a marked increase in size, refinement of their shape, and enhancement of their contour. Bone is a rigid structure that cannot grow interstitially and only enlarges by the apposition of new bone on its surface. Appositional growth alone is adequate for portions of the skeleton that enlarge slowly during maturation, such as the skull, and the diameter of long bones; however, it is insufficient for bones that must increase in size at a more rapid rate, such as the length of long and short tubular bones of the extremities, the vertebrae, and the ribs. Cartilage, in contrast, exhibits both appositional and interstitial growth; that is, it increases its volume and enlarges in all dimensions by adding new cells and elaborating freshly synthesized extracellular matrix. Con-sequently, the growth in length of tubular bones in embryos and prepubertal children occurs as growing cartilage is replaced by bone, with the majority of the increase in bone length derived from the cartilage primordium represented in the anlage and growth plate. In the case of cal-Ius, bone formation occurs both intramembranously in the fibrous callus and by endochondral cartilage replacement. The genetic code for skeletal morphogenesis is encrypted in the homeobox genes. Homeobox genes contain the DNA library of a repository of transcriptional regulators essential for growth and differentiation. The expression of homeobox genes occurs in a specific order and temporal sequence; and, regarding the skeletal system, their activa-tion results in the generation of localized cellular condensa-tions of primitive mesenchyme at the sites of future bones. The mesenchymal condensations are the earliest precur-sors of individual bones and are critical to the formation of the skeleton. They begin to develop just prior to day 40 of gestation and, depending upon their anatomic location, are derived from cells that migrate from the cranial neural crest, paraxial mesoderm (axial skel-eton), or the lateral plate mesoderm. Shortly after being formed, usually by the seventh week of gestation, the mesenchymal cells in the condensa-tions begin to alter their genetic expression and assume the morphology of matrix-forming cells. Those cells that mature into chondrocytes form a cartilage model or anlage of the future bone, which is fundamental to the process of endo-chondral ossification, whereas those that develop directly into osteoblasts produce bone via the mechanism of intra-membranous ossification. The mature bone tissue formed from either endochondral or intramembranous ossification is grossly and histologically indistinguishable. Endochondral Ossification Initially, the newly formed cartilage anlage is avascular and has the crude shape of the adult bone. The mesenchyme surrounding the anlage forms the perichon-drium, which is the precursor to the perios-teum that develops once ossification begins. This process is initiated in each bone at a specific time, and this temporal sequence is the same in all humans. adult bone. The attachment site of the Achilles tendon and the tibial-calcaneal joint are present. femur. The chondrocytes are regular with little hypertrophy. The perichondrium is composed of undifferentiated spindle cells with little intervening stroma, surrounded by a loose mesenchymal tissue. Growth of the anlage occurs both interstitially and appo-sitionally as a result of the proliferation of chondrocytes and the accumulation of secreted extracellular matrix -4.27). The matrix is composed of proteoglycans and type II collagen with smaller amounts of collagen types IX, X, XI, and XIII. As this process continues, three events occur at very nearly the same stage of development in every bone: perichondrium is in intimate contact with the cartilage. Cells of mesenchymal condensation surrounding an area in which they have differentiated into hyalin cartilage anlage. The chondrocytes show early hypertrophy. 1. The mesenchymal stems cells of the perichondrium, located around the midportion of the cartilaginous shaft, produce a layer of osteoblasts that deposit a collar of woven mineralized bone on the surface of the anlage. This heralds the transformation of the perichondrium into periosteum. The periosteum, osteoblasts, and the thin surface layer of bone delineate the middle region of the diaphysis and form the primary center of ossification. anlage containing hypertrophied chondrocytes. The thin, collar-like primary center of ossification is between the hypertrophying chondrocytes and the periosteal cells. 2. The chondrocytes in the center of the anlage shaft, encased by the periosteal shell of bone, begin to hyper-trophy and swell. The chondrocyte enlargement is accompanied by an increase in intracel-lular glycogen and in the deposition of type X collagen in the vicinity of the chondrocyte. Soon thereafter the chondrocytes undergo apoptotic necrosis. Concur-rently, the surrounding matrix mineralizes, largely via matrix vesicles derived from the chondrocytes. Some matrix crystallization mineralization may occur within the "holes" of the collagen fibers. 3. A capillary network originating from periosteal vessels forms and, with the aid of osteoclastic resorption, penetrate the woven bone of the primary center of ossification into the mineralized cartilage. The capillaries are the precursor to the future in an embryonic femur. The cellular layer of the periosteum is producing osteoblasts, which have formed a layer of pink osteoid. The outer spindle cells of the periosteum are oriented longitudinally along the femoral shaft. The underlying chondrocytes show hypertrophy. Primary center of ossification. A thin pink layer of osteoid, containing flattened osteocytes, separates the hypertrophied chondrocytes from the periosteal osteoblasts. nutrient vessels and are accompanied by pericytes and other primitive mesenchymal cells, including immature osteoprogenitor and osteoclast progenitor cells. As the cartilaginous core of the bone undergoes contin-ued resorption, osteoblasts derived from perivascular stem cells deposit layers of osteoid on the residual longitudinally indicating the early formation of the nutrient artery. Between these capillaries, new trabecular membranous woven bone is being formed in the cambium layer of the periosteum. The outer fibrous layer of the periosteum is more cellular than in the adult. oriented struts of mineralized cartilage. These trabeculae, composed of a central cartilaginous core covered by a rim of woven bone, are the first trabeculae formed, and together they form the primary spongiosa. The spaces that develop as a consequence of the cartilage resorption then coalesce and form the medullary cavity. The medul-lary cavity is initially filled with loose connective tissue and eventually becomes occupied by varying amounts of adipose tissue and hematopoietic elements. This complex process begins within the center of the shaft and progresses toward both ends of the bone as the bone lengthens (see later). When complete with primary trabeculae and an adjacent secondary center of ossification, the entrapped cartilage is recognized as the growth plate (the physis). Longitudinal growth of bones occurs only at the physis so that pins placed in the diaphy-sis or metaphysis and the epiphysis will separate with bone growth while pins placed only in the diaphysis will remain the same distance apart. The fully developed growth plate is structured and has been divided into five merging regions that corre-spond to different stages of chondrocyte maturation (Fig-ures 4.34-4.37). As the chondrocytes pass through the dif-ferent stages, they do not literally move within the matrix but mature in the position they occupy when first formed. Important regulators of this sequence of chondrocyte growth and maturation are the Indian hedgehog gene, para-thyroid hormone and parathyroid hormone-related protein. The zones include: a region of rest-ing or reserve chondrocytes located nearest the ends of the bone; a region of proliferating chondrocytes that become arranged in spiral columns; a region of chondrocyte hypertrophy; a region of chondrocyte apoptotic necro-sis and matrix mineralization; and a region of cartilage male. The secondary centers of ossification in the femoral heads are separated from the primary centers by the epiphyseal growth plates. The secondary center of ossification of the apophysis of the greater trochanter has not as yet formed. The metaphyses and diaphyses resemble their adult shapes. Photomicrograph of the epiphyseal growth plate of the costochondral junction from a 2-month-old male. The growth plate is surrounded by the ring of Ranvier. No secondary center is present. Primary trabeculae with central cartilaginous cores are seen in the metaphysis and upper diaphysis. resorption by osteoclasts that tunnel into the mineralized matrix and leave behind residuallongitudi-nal struts of cartilage that parallel the long axis of the bone. The orientation of the struts is determined by the pre-existing columnar arrangement of the chondrocytes in the proliferative and hypertrophied zones. These mineralized cartilaginous struts act as scaffolding for newly deposited woven bone and form the primary trabecu-lae. The rate of growth differs for each physeal plate and is greatest in the growth plate of the distal femur, followed by that of the proximal tibia. In diseases in which mineralization of the cartilage is impaired, removal of the cartilage is delayed, and the zone of hyper-trophy becomes massively and irregularly thickened. While most tubular long bones have two epiphyseal growth plates, other bones (such as the ribs and some of the phalanges, carpals, tarsals, metacarpals, and metatarsals) have only a single physis. The growth plates, located at the diaphyseal-epiphyseal junctions of the bones, are delineated peripher-ally by a circumferential, thin collar of membrane bone that is a continuation of the primary center of ossification and is called the ring of Ranvier. Concurrent with continued appositional and inter-stitial growth of epiphyseal and growth plate cartilage are dramatic changes in the cortex. As the bone increases in diameter, subperiosteal bone is deposited while the bone process of intramembranous ossification beneath the periosteum on the left and delineates the peripheral portion of the epiphyseal growth plate near the metaphysis. showing the reserve zone, the proliferating zone, the hypertrophied zone, and zone of mineralization ofthe cartilage. The primary trabeculae are oriented vertically and are supporting the base of the growth plate. Junction between the mineralized cartilage columns and the primary trabeculae with the mineralized cartilage cores covered by a layer of woven bone. along the endosteum is resorbed so that the cortical thick-ness remains proportionally uniform and the medullary cav-ity enlarges. The bone that first forms the cortex is woven in nature; but, within the first several years of life, the fabri-cated bone is lamellar. Variation in the rate of formation and resorption alters the shape of the bone. This process is most pronounced in a region just distal to the base of the growth plate, known as the "cut back" zone. The cut back zone is rich in subperiosteal osteoclasts, which reduce the diam-eter of the bone to that of the diaphysis, and this results in "funnelization" of the bone. At the same time, the cortical thickness is maintained or increases by appositional new bone formation on the endosteal surface of the cortex. Dur-ing growth and development, the diameter of the diaphysis continues to enlarge and in specific sites becomes asym-metric. This process is dynamic and not only determines the eventual diameter of the bone but controls the thick-ness and contour of the cortex and the arrangement of the trabeculae. Conditions altering the balance of bone formation and resorption may cause abnormally thickened or significantly thinned cortices. In most long bones, a similar process subsequently develops in the epiphysis, and this region is the second-ary center of ossification. A few long bones have a similar growth center in the apophyses. The maturation and replacement of the cartilage anlage in a sec-ondary center is identical to that which occurs in the diaph-ysis except that the maturation proceeds from the center showing the zone of mineralization of the cartilage and the cartilage struts are being covered by a thin layer of osteoid [blue-green). Capillaries with numerous erythrocytes are present between the primary bone trabeculae.IGoldner's stain) (This slide was prepared by Glimcher MJ, Roth SI, Schiller AL, as part of a course in the Pathophysiology of Bone for the Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.) centrifugally, toward the periphery This means that the growing area of the secondary center is, at first, a sphere. Eventually, the enlarging primary and secondary centers of ossification approach one another, entrapping a cylindrical of the femoral head. The nutrient vessels from the ligamentum teres are seen. Osteoid is seen on the cartilage trabeculae (oranqe] in the spherical center.segment of residual cartilage anlage and delineating the final form of the physeal plate. Continual growth of the primary and secondary centers of ossification results in the mergence of their reserve zones. At this time, a plate of bone demarcating the secondary cen-ter from the forming growth plate is deposited. From then on, the centrifugal growth of the epiphysis is hemispheric. The cartilage located at the base of the true articular carti-lage is responsible for progressive epiphyseal enlargement, and it has the architectural organization of a physis. Varia-tion in the sub articular growth results in concordance of the shapes of the ends of articulating bones. The epiphysis receives its nutrition primarily from blood vessels within the bone and its adjacent periosteum, whereas, the true articu-lar cartilage is nourished by synovial fluid. In the apophyseal cartilage, located on the surface of the bone, a secondary-like center of ossification appears and is responsible for the development of apophyseal bone of the iliac crests, the greater and lesser trochanters of the femur, and the tibial tuberosities, to name a few. Once endochondral ossification is well underway at the growth plate, modeling of the newly formed bone begins. The primary spongiosa undergoes complete osteoclastic resorption, and secondary trabeculae composed solely of lamellar bone are deposited. The expanding medullary cav-ity becomes largely free of spicules of cancellous bone in much of the diaphysis and fills with adipose tissue and the hematopoietic marrow. Subperiosteal bone deposition and endosteal resorption of the cortex maintains a proper, tubu-lar shape, and mechanical forces exerted by weight bearing and muscle attachments alter the rate of these processes in specific regions, which help sculpt the contour of the bone. Several hormones, including PTH, growth hormone, somatomedins, thyroid hormone, androgens, estrogens, and adrenal cortical hormones, are essential regulators of bone growth. At puberty, low doses of androgens and estrogens cause an increase in cell division in the proliferative zone of the growth plate and the secondary center of ossification. This is accompanied by an increase in the rate of cartilage maturation, mineralization, osteoclastic removal, and for-mation of primary trabeculae. In toto, these effects produce the so-called growth spurt seen at puberty. As estrogen and androgen levels increase and growth hormone and somato-medin levels fall off, chondrocyte proliferation decreases while maturation and bone formation proceed. This leads to a diminution or thinning of the growth plate, and eventually all of the cartilage of the growth plate undergoes complete endochondral ossification, leaving little or no evidence of its previous existence. At this time, the growth plate is considered closed, and all additional bone growth is appositional. Cessation of growth of the secondary cen-ters of ossification occurs in a similar fashion. However, a remnant of mineralized growth cartilage, which is the tide-mark cartilage, persists at the base of the articular surface. It is demarcated from the true articular cartilage by a thin The periphery of the plate has been bridged by bone connecting the diaphysis and the secondary center of ossification. Cellular proliferation in the physis has ceased while the maturation process continues. The secondary center of ossification is at the left of the micrograph above the remnant of the physis. undulating layer of more densely mineralized matrix, known as the tidemark. The biologic potential of the tidemark cartilage persists as increases in hormones, such as growth hormone in the setting of acromegaly, can reacti-vate the process of endochondral ossification and produce the tidemark. The tidemark separates the articular nonmineralized cartilage from the mineralized cartilage remnant of the physis and the lamellar bone ofthe subchondral plate. Intramembranous bone from a fetal skull. The osteoblasts are large along the randomly formed trabeculae. The osteocytes and their lacunae are large, round, and irregularly spaced in the trabeculae. additional growth in the adult. In normal circumstances, however, the vestige of the growth cartilage remains dor-mant and functions as an anchor of the true articular carti-lage to the subchondral bone plate. Intramembranous Ossification Intramembranous ossification, or bone growth, refers to the process of bone formation in which the tissue occupying the site of the future bone or bone tissue is a fibrous-like membrane. The membrane is rich in osteoprogenitor cells and in normal situations develops from the mesenchymal condensations in the developing embryo, the periosteum in the fetus, child, and adult, and the thin layer of fibrous tis-sue adjacent to all active bone-forming sites. The osteopro-genitor cells within the membrane produce offspring that differentiate into mature osteoblasts that directly deposit bone matrix. Large portions of the flat bones of the skull, including the frontal, parietal, occipi-tal, and temporal bones, form by this process. Also, since the cortices of all bones are largely created by osteoblasts derived from the cambium layer of the periosteum, all bones, in at least some part, are formed by intramembra-nous ossification. Growth of membranous bone occurs only by the apposition of new bone, and the medullary cavities of membranous bones are created and maintained by end-osteal osteoclastic activity. Initially, the marrow spaces of these bones are composed of highly vascularized loose con-nective tissue, which is eventually replaced by adipose and hematopoietic tissues. Modeling and Remodeling The processes of bone formation and resorption are tightly coupled, and their balance determines skeletal mass at any point in time. As the skeleton grows and enlarges during childhood and young adult-hood, bone formation predominates, whereas after the third or fourth decades bone resorption prevails. The breakdown and renewal of bone fundamental to the formation and maintenance of the skeleton is called remodeling. Remod-eling is a dynamic process involving the removal and replen-ishment of both cortical and trabecular bone; it continues throughout life to maintain bone mass, skeletal integrity, and skeletal function. This process is complex and at least partially controlled by the central nervous system through hormones and by mechani-cally induced microdamage. It depends on the integrated actions of osteoblasts, osteocytes, and osteoclasts. Together these cells form the functional or basic multicel-lular unit of bone and, in adults, are responsible for remodeling approximately 10% of the skeleton on an annual basis. This feat is accomplished by approximately 1million BMUs that are active at anyone time, and which likely first target sites that are experiencing fatigue and microdam-age. The process may begin on any bony surface and incorporates three phases of cell activity: Activation, bone resorption, and bone formation. Basic multicellular unit of bone. Osteoclasts form the leading edge of the bone resorption ("the cutting cone"), and just behind them are mononuclear macrophages and osteoblasts. The newly created space is filled with a vascular loose connective tissue. osteoblasts are replaced by osteoclasts. New osteoblastic bone fills the resorbed lacunae of the haversian canal. Many pathologic conditions of bone result from abnormalities in bone remodeling. These disorders may be generalized, in the form of a metabolic bone disease, or localized to small regions of the skeleton or individual bones. For instance, the diminished bone mass in postmeno-pausal osteoporosis, hyperparathyroidism, and hyperthy-roidism results from increased osteoclastic bone resorption, which is not adequately compensated for by an appropriate amount of new bone formation. The lytic lesions in early Paget's disease or those caused by metastases and myeloma result from localized increased osteoclastic bone resorption, which is significantly greater in amount than any new bone that is deposited. The goal of therapy for this broad spec-trum of diseases is to restore bone mass, balance bone for-mation and resorption, and protect and maintain structural integrity.