The biconvex ocular lens is located directly behind the pupil and in front of the anterior face of the vitreous. In the adult, it measures approximately 10 mm in diameter and 4 to 5 mm in width. The lens is held in place by zonules that connect it to the pars plicata of the ciliary body. The lens is encircled by a collagen- and carbohydrate-rich capsule which serves as the site of attachment for the zonules. The capsule over the anterior surface of the lens thickens with time. At 2 to 3 years of age, the anterior capsule is almost 8 to 15 11mwide and increases to 14 to 21 11mby 35 years The posterior lens cap-sule reaches its maximum thickness at about 35 years of • of epithelial cells in hematoxylin and eosin-stained preparations (feffl. The lens capsule is rich in carbohydrate and reacts intensely with the periodic acid-Schiff stain. anteriorly, and epithelial cells are absent. age and then diminishes to 2 to 9 urnafter age 70 years. Directly interior to the ante-rior lens capsule is a single layer of cuboidal epithelium. These cells extend to about the level of the lens equator; they do not normally exist posterior to this point. Proliferat-ing epithelial cells elongate at the lens equator and become displaced toward the center of the lens, known as the lens nucleus, where they are retained for life. This process con-tinues throughout life and the long slender cells are des-ignated lens fibers. In the peripheral part of the lens near the equator, the fibers retain their nuclei, but as the fibers become displaced toward the center of the lens their nuclei disintegrate so that the center of the lens lacks nuclei. In some cataractous lenses, such as the cataract of rubella, the fibers within the center of the lens retain their nuclei. in a posterior concave or umbilicated appearance. This figure also illus-trates an artifactual absence of most of the corneal epithelium.The normally transparent lens commonly opacities with age. Discrete globules of degenerate lens fibers may form. They are frequently accompanied by the presence of an extension of epithelial cells, posterior to the equator. The high density of the lens fibers makes it difficult to obtain histologic sections of the lens that are free from artifact. Infant eyes can demonstrate an artifact of fixation resulting in an umbilicated, dimpled or concave configura-tion of the posterior surface of the lens.