During the prenatal period and childhood, muscle fibers continue to increase in length until full growth is attained. Muscle fibers lengthen in response to growth of the skel-eton by virtue of two fundamental changes in the sarco-meres. Existing sarcomeres lengthen, producing longitudi-nal fiber growth. This mechanism may account for up to a 25% increase in fiber length and indicates that there is a relative "excess" of sarcomeres that may elongate during periods of rapid growth of the skeleton. Muscle fibers also undergo real longitudinal growth with the addition of new sarcomeres, which involves the synthesis of contractile pro-teins. New sarcomeres are known to be added at the end of fibers, usually at the myotendinous junctions. There is also evidence to suggest that new sarcomeres are not only added at the end of fibers, but within internal segments as well. Whether the actual number of muscle fibers is augmented after birth is the subject of a current debate. Until recently the myofiber population was thought to be relatively stable after birth and throughout adult life. Several recent stud-ies, however, seem to suggest a gradual rise in the number of fibers between birth and the end of the fifth decade. In some muscles, the total increase in fibers may reach 80 to 100% of the neonatal level. The mechanism accounting for an increase in the fiber population probably involves a population of dividing stem cells that subsequently undergo fusion to produce new mature fibers. A major aspect ofgrowth of muscle fibers after birth relates to an increase in transverse dimension. In general, between birth and adult-hood there is a five-fold increase in muscle fiber diameters. For example, in the leg muscles, the average diameter of mature fibers is 45 11mas compared to 7 11mat birth. The enlargement in fiber diameters does not proceed at an even rate from birth to early adulthood, when fibers obtain a maximum diameter. Instead, fiber diameters increase at a relatively slow rate until puberty, when a burst of growth occurs. As an example, in the gastrocnemius, fibers more than triple in size from age 12to age 21years. A major revision in the histochemical profile of mus-cle occurs after birth. In the term infant, a checkerboard staining pattern is clearly evident in alkaline ATPase reac-tions. However, fiber typing is often not distinct in oxidative enzyme reactions. The emergence of type 1, 2A, and 2B fibers in oxidative preparations occurs during infancy. Undifferentiated fibers having both abundant oxi-dative enzyme and ATPase activity represent approximately 20% of fibers at birth. These gradually differentiate into type 1 and type 2 fibers during the first year of life. The fate of Wohlfart type B fibers, comprising about 1% of myofibers at birth, is unknown. They are not seen in biopsies of chil-dren past the age of 12 months. The connective tissue elements of muscle are much more prominent at birth, particularly the perimysial compo-nents. Immediately after birth the perimysium may account for up to 20% of the cross-sectional area of muscle tissue. During early childhood, the perimysium and other connec-tive tissue components rapidly shrink to less than 5% of the cross-sectional area, in part because of the enlargement of the muscle fibers. In the immediate postnatal period, blood vessels appear excessively thickened as a result of the presence of abundant smooth muscle ele-ments. Expansion of the luminal diameter of blood vessels dative enzyme reactions. in the first year of life gives the vascular elements an adult appearance. The noncontractile, supporting connective tis-sue contains abundant collagen and scattered fibroblasts. Foci of hematopoiesis remain after birth, containing stem cells, erythroblasts, and myelocytes. These foci are more likely to be seen in the distal muscles of the extremities. They disappear within 1 month after birth.