Located between the outer scleral covering and the inner retina is the uveal tract, which begins anteriorly as the iris, extends to the ciliary body, and then to the choroid posteriorly. The designated term uvea is derived from the Latin word uva because this portion of the eye was thought to somewhat resemble the dark color of a grape after the sclera and cornea are stripped from the globe. The Iris The iris is a thin diaphragm of tissue with a central opening, the pupil, which functions to regulate the amount of light reaching the retina. Muscles within the iris dilate or constrict the pupil in response to sympathetic or parasympathetic nerve impulses. The diameter of the iris is approximately 21 mm, whereas the diameter of the pupil ranges from 1 to 8 mm. The iris is thinnest at its point of attachment with the ciliary body peripherally, the iris root. Normally, the iris rests gently upon the crystalline lens and, therefore, bulges slightly forward. Structurally and develop-mentally, the iris consists of two main parts: the stroma and the posterior epithelial lining. Numerous ridges and depressions may be identified in tissue sections of the anterior iris stroma. These correspond to the contraction folds and furrows seen on clinical exami-nation. The anterior surface of the iris lacks a cellular lin-ing. The stroma contains melanocytes, nerve cells, blood vessels, and smooth muscle in a loose connective tissue background. The color of the iris is due to the number of stromal melanocytes present. Lightly pigmented individuals with blue irises have relatively few stromal melanocytes. In contrast, darkly pigmented individuals with brown irises have numerous melanocytes within the iris stroma . In addition to melanocytes, melanosome-containing macrophages are also scattered within the iris stroma, par-ticularly at the iris root. A thick collar of collagen fibers nor-mally surrounds the blood vessels within the iris stroma. To the inexperienced observer, these normal vessels may appear to have arteriolosclerosis. In the pathologic process of iris neovascularization, thin-walled blood vessels, which lack such a collagenous coat, cover the anterior surface of the iris. The sphincter muscle, a bundle of circularly arranged smooth muscle innervated by parasym-epithelial lining. The sphincter muscle of the iris is evi-dent within the stroma. The pigmented posterior epithelial lining nor-mally extends around the lip of the pupil anteriorly for a short distance.pathetic nerves, acts to constrict the pupil. Located within the posterior stroma of the pupillary zone, the sphincter pupillae is nearly 1 mm wide. Radially oriented smooth muscle fibers with scattered cytoplasmic melanosomes are also located within the stroma of the iris. Innervated by sympathetic nerves, this muscle is active in pupil dilatation. Posteriorly, the iris is lined by two separate, but closely apposed, epithelial layers derived from neuroectoderm. The cells of the anterior epithelial layer, which are in direct con-tact with the posterior aspect of the stroma, are continu-ous with smooth muscle fibers of the dilator pupillae; the sphincter pupillae are of similar developmental origin. The posterior iris pigment epithelial layer is in direct contact with the aqueous of the posterior chamber. The cytoplasm of both epithelial layers contains numerous melanosomes, which are larger than those of the iris stroma. The number of melanosomes in the iris epithelial layers does not vary significantly between lightly and darkly pig-mented individuals. In persons with ocular and oculocu-taneous albinism, the pigmented epithelia, as well as the stromal melanocytes, contain fewer melanin granules than in normal individuals. The pigmented epithelia of the iris normally extend around the lip of the pupil, anteriorly, for a short distance. In certain pathologic conditions, fibrovas-cular tissue on the anterior surface of the iris everts the pupillary margin and pulls the pigmented epithelia onto the anterior surface of the iris. This displaced pigmented epi-thelium may be apparent clinically and is known as ectro-pIOn uveae. The Ciliary Body The middle segment of the uveal tract, the ciliary body, is located between the iris and the choroid. Situated interior to the anterior sclera, it is made up of two ring-shaped com-ponents: the pars plicata and the pars plana. The anteriormost aspect of the ciliary body, the pars pli-cata begins at the scleral spur and contains approximately 70 sagitally oriented folds (approximately 2 mm long and 0.8 mm high). Continuous with these folds the flat pars plana, which is approximately 4 mm wide, merges posteriorly with the serrated anterior border of the retina. Both portions of the ciliary body consist of epithelium, stroma, and smooth muscle. The ciliary epithelium embraces two distinct layers, both of which share a similar development derivation from neural ectoderm. The inner epithelial layer is virtually nonpigmented and is contiguous with the aque-ous of the posterior chamber. At the ora serrata, the sensory retina converges into the nonpigmented ciliary epithelial monolayer, which extends anteriorly until it becomes the posterior epithelial layer of the iris. In contrast, the outer ciliary epithelial layer is pigmented and unites with the reti-nal pigment epithelium at the ora serrata. The pigmented in the stroma of an individual with a brown iris than with a blue iris. The amount of pigment in the posterior epithelial lining is similar in irises of different colors. Blood vessels in the iris stroma are normally surrounded by a thick collar of collagen fibers; this should not be confused as arteriolosclerosis. In contrast to the posterior surface of the iris, the anterior iris lacks a cellular lining (Left: H&E x66; right: H&E x66). this photograph. The ciliary body has two components: the pars plicata and the pars plana. The pars plicata contains about 70 sagitally oriented folds or ciliary processes. The pars plicata gradually merges with the flat pars plana. (Reproduced from: Klintworth GK, Landers MB III. The Eye: Structure and Function. Baltimore, MD: Williams &Wilkins; 1976, with permission.)epithelium of the ciliary body overlies a PAS-positive basal lamina that is closely adherent to the adjacent stroma. The basal lamina of the pigmented epithelium can become con-spicuously thickened in diabetes mellitus. Acellular fibers, known as zonules, attach the crests of the nonpigmented ciliary epithelium in the pars plicata to the capsule of the crystalline lens. The stroma of the ciliary body, composed of fibroblasts, blood vessels, nerve cells, and melanocytes, is most abun-dant in the ciliary processes of the pars plicata, and is least plentiful in the valleys between these processes and in the pars plana. During infancy, the stroma of the ciliary body is sparse but expands until adulthood. With advanced age, the ciliary body stroma becomes hyalin-ized and frequently calcifies. The smooth muscle of the ciliary body forms three distinct bundles. The outermost muscle runs in a longitudinal or meridional direction, whereas the middle layer contains radially oriented fibers, and the innermost muscle cells are aligned in a circular fashion. In routinely processed globes, histologic differentiation of these three muscular layers is difficult. Muscles of the ciliary body p·c layer is adjacent to the underlying stroma. Acellular eosinophilic fibers attach to the crests of the nonpigmented epithelium ofthe pars plicata. Zonules do not originate in the valleys between the ciliary processes. Right. Zonular fibers span between the pars plicata ofthe ciliary body and the lens and hold the lens in place. attach in large part to the scleral spur. The ciliary muscle assists in accommodation. As it contracts, the ciliary body extends forward, reducing pressure on the zonules and enabling the lens to become less concave and thereby increasing its refractive power. Choroid The richly vascularized choroid extends from the ciliary body to the optic nerve. Its inner aspect is firmlyadherent to the retinal pigment epithelium. The outer surface of the choroid is loosely attached to the overlying sclera. Bruch's membrane delineates the choroid from the overlying retinal pigment epithelium and is approximately 2 to 4 urn thick. Although Bruch's membrane appears as a thin eosinophilic layer in tissue sections, ultrastructural analysis has disclosed it to be composed of five distinct lay-ers: the basal lamina of the overlying retinal pigment epithe-lium, a collagenous layer, an elastic fiber-rich component, the stroma ofthe ciliary processes is sparse. The stroma continuesto expand until adulthood and with advancing age the ciliary processes become hyalinized. body. Pigmented melanocytes are often present in between the smooth muscle bundles. another collagenous portion, and the basal lamina of the endothelial cells of the underlying capillary network (cho-riocapillaris). Located in the innermos t choroidal stroma adjacent to Bruch's membrane, the choriocapillaris con-nects with arterial and venous channels from vessels in the outer choroidal stroma. Its function is to nourish the outer retinal layers. With age, Bruch's membrane thickens and commonly acquires focal excrescences known as drusen. Both drusen and Bruch's membrane may calcify. The choroidal stroma is thinnest anteriorly, near the cili-ary body, where it is approximately 0.1 mm thick. Posteriorly, at the optic nerve, the choroidal stroma thickens to nearly 0.22 mm. The tenuous connection between the choroidal stroma and the sclera is responsible for both the pathologic and artifactual separations often seen between these two choroid. Atthe top of the figure, the choroid abuts the sclera. The single layer of retinal pigment epithelium is present at the bottom of the figure. An amorphous excrescence in Bruch's mem-brane appears to extend into the underlying retina. Such so-called "drusen" are common and occasionally calcify. layers in histologic sections. The stroma contains abundant pigmented melanocytes, which are more numerous in heavily pigmented individuals than in persons with little pigment. Collagen fibers, some smooth muscle, neurons of the autonomic nervous system, and a prominent vascular system are also present. Large- and medium-sized arteries and veins are situated in the outermost choroid. the choroidal stroma. ONL [ lNL [ GeL C]IS ] OPL directly above the retinal pigment epithelium in this figure. Specialized extensions ofthe photoreceptors known as the outer and inner segments are located immediately adjacent to the RPE. Cell bod-ies of the photoreceptors are present in the outer nuclear layer; synapses between the bipolar cells, horizontal cells, and the photoreceptors occur in the outer plexiform layer; the inner nuclear layer embraces nuclei ofthe amacrine, bipolar, horizontal, and Muller cells; the inner plexiform contains axons and dendrites of amacrine, bipolar, and ganglion cells; ganglion cell bodies are located in the ganglion cell layer; the nerve fiber layer contains ganglion cell axons. (Reproduced from: Klintworth GK, landers MB III. The Eye: Structure and Function. Baltimore, MD: Williams &Wilkins; 1976, with permission.)