Presbycusis and Other Hearing Loss Hearing loss may include conductive hearing loss and sen-sorineural hearing loss. There are many causes for conduc-tive and sensorineural hearing loss, respectively . Hearing loss that occurs with increasing age is referred to as presbycusis. There is still controversy as to the underlying electrophysiologic and histopathologic alterations associated with the development of presbycu-sis. Degenerative alterations within various microanatomic hearing loss. ral hearing loss. Primary damage to hair cells in organ of corti structures of the cochlea, including the hair cells, spiral ganglion cells, stria vascularis and basilar membrane have been invoked as the cause of presbycusis. Alter-natively, damage to the outer hair cells alone has been invoked as the cause of presbycusis. As Soucek et al. have shown in their studies of aged ears, the histopathologic changes include scanty to absent outer hair cells of the third row with complete loss of both inner and outer hair cells of all rows at the extreme lower end of the basal coil. In contrast to these aforementioned sites, Soucek et al. found that the inner hair cells sustained minimal loss, the first row of outer hair cells had greater loss and the second row more loss but not to the extent seen in the third row of outer hair cells or at the extreme lower end of the basal coil. In addi-tion, these authors also found the presence of enormously lengthened and thickened stereocilia and giant stereocilia which they felt contribute to the development of pres-bycusis. Degenerative alterations within various micro-anatomic structures of the membranous labyrinth result-ing in sensorineural hearing loss may occur secondary to infectious disease, metabolic abnormalities, trauma, sensory presbycusis, and secondary to use of certain medica-tions including cisplatin, diuretic agents, and other drugs. Meniere's Disease Meniere's disease is an idiopathic disorder of the inner ear associated with a symptom complex of spontaneous, epi-sodic attacks of vertigo, sensorineural hearing loss, tinni-tus, and a sensation of aural fullness. Meniere's disease ischaracterized by a set of symptoms including fluctuating sensorineural hearing loss, episodes of vertigo, tinnitus, and pressure sensation in the ear. The onset of vertigo is fre-quently sudden reaching maximum intensity within a few minutes lasting for an hour or more and either subsiding cochlea of an elderly man. There are many gaps among the hair cells of the first two rows. P,pillar cells. Osmic acid, alcian blue, and phloxine eosin. total degeneration of the organ of Corti. tes characterized by the presence of hyalinized vasculature structures in the stria vascularis. organ of Corti. Sensory presbycusis characterized by the loss of hair cells in the organ of Corti. by cisplatin therapy with strial atrophy. loss of hair cells. A completely or continuing as a sensation of unsteadiness for hours to days. The pathogenesis of Meniere's disease is distortion of the membranous labyrinth defined as changes in the micro-anatomy of the membranous labyrinth as a consequence of the overaccumulation of endolymph (endolymphatic hydrops) and at the expense of the perilymphatic space. Endolymph which is produced by the stria vascu-laris in the cochlea and by cells in the vestibular labyrinth circulates in a radial and a longitudinal fashion. In patients with Meniere's disease, it is believed that there is inadequate absorption of endolymph by the endolymphatic sac. In the early stages of the disease, endolymphatic hydrops primarily involves the cochlear duct and the sac-cule but in the later stages, the entire endolymphatic sys-tem is involved. Alterations of the membranous labyrinth include dilatation, outpouching, rupture, and collapse (Fig-ure 14.59). Fistulae may occur. Severe cytoarchitectural and atrophic changes may occur in the sense organs with loss of neurons in the cochlea. Michaels et al. described a thin highly vascular layer of bone surrounding most of the intravestibular endolymphatic duct. In the normal ear, this contains osteoblasts, some of which are in apoptosis, which may help to control the potassium composition of the endo-lymph. These authors found that in Meniere's disease, there is widespread death of vascular and other structures in the arch, probably by apoptosis. Such alterations may lead to hyperkalemia in the nearby endolymph and provoke hydrops and the symptoms of Meniere's disease.