The corneoscleral junction, or limbus, is not a distinct ana-tomic site, but is a significant landmark clinically. Most sur-gical procedures on the anterior part of the eye are accom-plished after access via an incision in the limbal area. For purposes of discussion, the trabecular meshwork and Sch-lernm's canal will be considered as part of the corn eo scleral limbus. The limbus is approximately l.5 to 2.0 mm wide and separate layers of the cornea merge with components of the sclera or conjunctiva in this area. The peripheral cornea with the anterior sclera, and is not a distinct ana-tomic site. Clinically the limbus is an important landmark. The conjunc-tiva of the limbus is composed of epithelium and stroma. The thin connective tissue layer of Tenon's capsule overlies the epi-sclera.The corneal and scleral stroma merge gradually in the area marked "0". Vessels of the conjunctival stroma, episclera, and limbal plexus are illustrated. The projection of collagen fibers known as the scleral spurmerges with the smooth muscle fibers of the ciliary body. Schlemm's canal and the trabecular meshworkare responsible for removal of aqueous from the eye. Occasion-ally, processes from the iris insert upon the trabecular meshwork. Bowman's layer and Descemet's membrane both terminate in the area of the limbus. (Reproduced from: Hogan MJ, Alvarado JA, Weddell JE. Histology of the Human Eye. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1971, with permission.) limbal area and represents the peripheral termination of Descemet's membrane. Prominent Schwalbe's rings are identified histologi-cally in about 15% of eyes.squamous epithelium of the cornea extends centrifugally beyond the limbus until it meets the epithelium of the bul-bar conjunctiva. At the limbus, Bowman's layer of the cor-nea blends into the subepithelial tissues of the conjunctiva and the corneal and scleral stroma become continuous with each other. Descemet's membrane abruptly terminates in the limbal region and gives rise to the clinically signifi-cant landmark known as Schwalbe's ring. In about 15% of eyes, a prominent area of thickening is identified histologi-cally at this site. Immediately adjacent to Schwalbe's ring is the most anterior aspect of the tra-becular meshwork. Both the trabecular meshwork and Schlemm's canal constitute the apparatus responsible for the removal of aqueous from the eye. Aque-ous drainage occurs in the angle between the anterior sur-face of the iris and the sclera. Histologically, the meshwork appears as a collection of finely branching and delicately / I I. meshwork. Schlemrn's canal is an endothelial channel which enables aqueous to drain from the eye. Aqueous reaches Schlemrn's canal after percolating through the connective tissue strands of the trabecular meshwork. B.Structures within and near the angle of the anterior chamber are depicted in this drawing. In this illustration, Schlernrn's canal has two channels, one of which is in communication with a small collecting channel. The collecting channel is intimately associated with the limbal part of the tra-becular meshwork. The scleral spur is closely associated with the trabecular meshwork. Descemet's membrane terminates peripherally in the area denoted "e" and "q". Some componentsof the trabecular meshwork arise at the ciliary body. Isolated strands of meshwork merge with a nearby process from the anterior surface of the iris. A muscle of the ciliary bodyattaches to the trabecular meshwork as indi-cated by the arrows. The corneal endothelium merges with endothelial cells of the meshwork. (Reproduced from: Hogan MJ, Alvarado JA, Weddell JE. Histology of the Human Eye. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1971, with permission.) pigmented connective tissue bands. The cells, which line the trabecular meshwork, are continuous with the corneal endothelium. Posteriorly, the trabecular meshwork extends to a roughly triangular-shaped projection of scleral connec-tive tissue, known as the scleral spur. Located slightly anterior and superficial to the trabec-ular meshwork is Schlemm's canal, an endothelial-lined venous channel that completely encircles the limbus. Since Schlemm's canal sometimes gives off smaller branches, two lumens are occasionally seen on histologic sections of the anterior chamber angle. Although the trabecular meshwork and Schlemm's canal appear to be in intimate contact in tissue sections, they are separated from each other by a thin layer of connective tissue and separate endothelial linings. Aqueous percolates among the delicate beams of the trabec-ular meshwork before becoming transported to Schlemm's canal. Ultrastructural examination of this region discloses giant cytoplasmic vacuoles in the endothelial lining of Sch-lernm's canal, adjacent to the trabecular meshwork. These vacuoles are thought by some to contain fluid in the process of being transported from the trabecular meshwork into the lumen of Schlemm's canal. Once in Schlemm's canal, aqueous drains into the episcleral venous plexus by way of numerous small collector channels. Prolonged obstruction to the outflow of aqueous results in increased intraocular pressure and glaucoma. CONJUNCTIVA, CARUNCLE, AND PLICA SEMILUNARIS The conjunctiva is a thin continuous mucous membrane lining the inner surface of the eyelids and much of the ante-rior surface of the eye. In addition to its protective function, the conjunctiva allows the eyelids to move smoothly over the globe. The conjunctival epithelium is composed of two to five layers of columnar cells and rests upon a basal lam-ina. Within the conjunctival epithelium are goblet cells that secrete mucoid material that becomes incorporated into the tear film. Melanocytes are present in conjunctival epithelium. Scattered mononuclear cells are often present in apparently healthy individuals in the underlying conjunctival stroma. In dark-skinned individuals, the basal layers of the con-junctival epithelium are pigmented. the basal epithelial layers and, like melanocytes in the skin, transfer melanosomes into the adjacent epithelial cells. These pigmented epithelial cells are numerous in dark-skinned individuals. The loose, fibrovascular subepithelial connective tissue of the conjunctival stroma normally contains nerve cells, melanocytes, and accessory lacrimal glands. Lymphoid follicles with germinal centers reside in the conjunctiva, particularly in areas where the conjunctiva lining the inner surface of the eyelid merges with the portion covering the eyeball (supe-rior and inferior fornices); scattered lymphocytes are not unusual within the conjunctiva. Hence, their presence is not indicative of chronic conjunctivitis unless both plasma cells and significant numbers of lymphocytes are present. Three distinct areas of the conjunctiva are recognized (Fig-ure 13.15): the palpebral conjunctiva, the bulbar conjunc-tiva, and the conjunctiva lining the fornices. The morphologic attributes of the conjunctiva vary in different parts of this tissue. Although goblet cells exist lacrimal tissue are present in the stroma of the palpebral conjunctiva. palpebral conjunctiva lines the posterior surface of the eyelid. The bulbar conjunctiva extends from the limbus over the anterior sclera. The bulbar and palpebral conjunctivae converge upon the conjunctiva ofthe superior and inferior fornices. throughout the epithelium of the bulbar conjunctiva, they are more common in the inferior and nasal parts. Goblet cells are particularly abundant in the forniceal regions. The conjunctival stroma is thickest in the fornices and bulbar areas and thinnest in the palpebral conjunctiva and at the corneosclerallimbus, where small conjunctival papillae, known as the palisades of Vogt, are evident. The palpebral conjunctiva is firmly attached to the inner sur-face of the eyelids, but the bulbar conjunctiva is loosely adherent to the underlying sclera by thin connective tis-sue strands. The palpebral conjunctiva, which lines the posterior sur-face of the eyelids, extends from the fornices to the mucocu-taneous junction at the eyelid margins, where the epithelium of the conjunctiva merges abruptly with the epidermis of the anterior surface of the eyelids. The palpebral conjunctiva contains several infoldings of epithelium. Islands of accessory lacrimal glands that are morphologi-cally identical to the main tear-producing gland within the orbit occur within the palpebral conjunctiva. The subcon-junctival tissue of the upper fornix may contain over 40 such glands, but fewer than 10 accessory lacrimal glands are present in the lower fornix. The upper eyelids have approximately two to five accessory lacrimal glands located at the superior aspect of the tarsus. The bulbar conjunctiva begins at the limbus, at which point the corneal epithelium gradually becomes replaced by conjunctival epithelium and continues over the sclera to the superior and inferior fornices. There, the conjunctiva is thrown into small folds before becoming the palpebral conjunctiva. Both the caruncle and the plica semilunaris (semilu-nar fold) represent specialized segments of the conjunctiva. The caruncle is the nodular mass of fleshylacrimal co,uncleLacrimal lakeSemilunar fold portions of the conjunctiva and are located in the medial interpalpebral angle of the eye. Before tears enter the lacrimal drainage apparatus through the lacrimal punctum, they accumulate at the medial canthus. The demarcation between the conjunctival and cutane-ous portions of the eyelid is discernible clinically at the so-called "gray line." The secretions of the meibomian glands reach the surface of the eyelids at small orifices. (Reproduced from: Newell FW. Ophthalmology; Principles and Concepts. St Louis: CV Mosby; 1986, with permission.) tissue located in the medial interpalpebral angle of the eye. Its surface is covered by a stratified nonkeratinized squa-mous epithelium. The subepithelial stroma of the caruncle contains hair follicles, smooth muscle, sebaceous glands, adipose connective tissue, and occasionally, accessory lac-rimal glands, as well as sweat glands. The plica semiluna-ris, an arc-shaped fold of conjunctiva located immediately lateral to the caruncle, is thought to be a vestigial remnant of the nictitating membrane of lower species. The histo-logic features of the plica semilunaris are similar to those in other areas of the conjunctiva, except that the epithelium contains abundant goblet cells and, rarely, cartilage is pres-ent within the stroma.