Some of the earliest studies addressing differences between males and females with regard to muscle fiber size and com-position were conducted by Brooke and his colleagues. In a seminal study of the biceps muscle in six patients, they established certain principles that remain generally true concerning gender differences in skeletal muscle. Individ-ual muscle fibers are larger in males than in females for several reasons. Explanations include the fact that males are generally bigger than females, being taller and heavier, with a larger muscle mass for body size. Males are also more active and frequently engage in more strenuous physical exertion. Androgens are also thought to playa role in the size of muscle fibers in males, since it is known that testos-terone supplements produce muscle fiber hypertrophy. In males, type 2 fibers are usually larger than type 1 fibers, in contrast to females where type 1 fibers tend to be of equal or greater diameter. An excellent summary of this subject was published by Bennington who showed that some of the differences between males and females are depen-dent upon the muscles sampled. For example, studies of the biceps muscle essentially verify the findings of Brooke et al. However, examination of the vastus lateralis indicates no significant difference in diameter between type 1 and type 2 fibers in males. Another interesting conclusion from these studies addresses the question of fiber type predominance in the two sexes. With regard to the biceps muscle, males have a much higher percentage of type 2 fibers, whereas females have almost equal numbers of each. On the con-trary, in the vastus lateralis, both males and females have similar proportions of type 1 and type 2 fibers. The effect of exercise and training on skeletal muscle has been examined in a host of investigations over the past 25 years. The results of many of these studies are conflict-ing, but certain general principles have emerged. It is clear that exercise and training of any type causes an increase in muscle fiber diameters. Activities that are basically anaerobic in nature promote hypertrophy of type 2 fibers, a common finding in sprinters. In long-distance runners, for whom aerobic metabolism is more important, type 1 fibers tend to be larger. Most authorities agree that power training such as weight lifting results in remarkable hypertrophy of type 2 fibers and less, if any, enlargement of type 1fibers. A more controversial topic is whether there is a change in fiber type composition after long periods of training. It iswell known that sprinters tend to have larger numbers of type 2 fibers than sedentary controls and long-distance run-ners tend to have more type 1 fibers than untrained coun-terparts. Many investigators tend to believe that these two groups of runners have genetically determined fiber type composition and little, if any, conversion of fiber types takes place during training. However, some studies have shown that although conversion from type 1 to type 2 fibers prob-ably does not occur, certain activities such as endurance running may be responsible for the conversion of type 2B to type 2A fibers over prolonged periods of time. Animal studies have shed minimal light on these questions, in part because animal muscle responds differently to exercise and training than does human muscle. In fact, animal experi-ments have more often clouded the issues of exercise and fiber composition instead of resolving the controversy. During the process of aging, there is a functional and structural decline in skeletal muscle beginning in the sixth decade and accelerating after the age of 70 years. By the age of 75 years, there is a 30 to 50% decline in muscle strength, the cause of which is complex. Part of the answer lies in the reduction of fiber diameter. For several reasons, fiber diam-eters at the age of 75 are reduced on average to 80% of diameters at the age of 25. Because the force of contraction does not have a linear relationship with fiber diameter, but is proportional to the cross-sectional area of the fiber, which is determined by its radius squared, a radius that is 80% smaller than normal leads to a 60% loss in strength. The reduction in fiber diameter is due, in part, to an alteration in growth factors, perhaps the most important of which is myostatin. Myostatin, also known as growth differentiation factor 8, is a mem-ber of the transforming growth factor family. Myostatin is a negative regulator of muscle, impacting both fiber num-ber and size. Ithas recently been discovered that myostatin binds to activin II receptors, acting through the receptor-associated proteins smad and smad 3. Myostatin signaling induces the inhibitory protein smad 7. Myostatin becomes a mediator of catabolic pathways in muscle cells. Unclear at present is what activates latent myostatin in aging muscle. Because of the alterations in the composition of their connective tissues, associated with decreased elasticity and flexibility, and because many older patients have joint dis-ease of varying severity, the elderly become less active with a corresponding reduction in muscle volume and contrac-tile strength. Some experts view this condition as a form of disuse. Their conclusions are supported by the fact that aging individuals, like young patients who do not use their muscles, have selective atrophy of type 2 fibers. The effect of poor nutrition in the elderly has not been extensively studied, although it is well known that cachexia is also accompanied by atrophy of type 2 fibers. A second problem in the elderly population is an insidi-ous damage to the motor units, specifically to the anterior horn cells in the spinal cord. It has repeatedly been shown that with advancing age there is a progressive loss of ante-rior horn cells. Due to degenerative spine disease, there is also injury to nerve roots, with subsequent radiculopathy. The integrity of the muscle fiber is closely related to the maintenance of its nerve supply. Any sustained interrup-tion of trophic influences from the motor neuron or nerve will culminate in atrophy of the denervated muscle fiber. In acutely denervated muscle, randomly distributed small fibers are seen. When sectioned transversely, atrophic fibers are characteristically angular or ensate. They appear flat-tened and bipolar with tapering ends. Most or all of the atrophic fibers are dark in alkaline ATPase reactions and are of glycolytic type. At this stage, selective atrophy of type 2 fibers is commonly the only pathologic abnormality, so that the proper diagnosis of denervation requires corrobo-rative clinical information. With progressive denervation, the proportion of atrophic type 1 and type 2 fibers tends to equalize. As long as atrophic fibers remain scattered and are not yet grouped together, from a diagnostic perspective, the pattern of atrophy is nonspecific. The esterase stain is very useful under these circum-stances because denervated fibers are extremely dark in esterase preparations, whereas atrophic fibers in other con-ditions are not. Atrophic fibers are also excessively dark in oxidative enzyme reactions, but such staining applies to fiber atrophy of almost any cause. Small dark fibers are probably explained by the fact that mitochondria are relatively spared in the atrophic process and occupy a proportionately greater volume of sarcoplasm. The affinity of atrophic fibers for oxidative enzyme stains means that the ATPase reaction is preferable for accurate fiber typing of small fibers, no mat-ter what the pathogenesis of fiber atrophy is. Prima facie evidence of advanced denervation is a pro-gression from random fiber atrophy to grouped atrophy in which multiple collections of small, angular or ensate fibers are present in the biopsy sample. As a consequence of chronic denervation and of reinnervation, the normal checkerboard staining profile observed in histoenzymatic reactions is effaced. In an effort to reestab-lish the nerve supply to denervated muscle fibers, intact Grouped atrophy. intramuscular nerves undergo collateral sprouting, and new synapses are formed with atrophic fibers. As motor units enlarge, reinnervated fibers occupying a large area are con-verted to one histochemical type. The phenomenon of type grouping is explained by the fact that all mus-cle fibers within a single motor unit are of the same type-either type 1 or type 2-and the motor neuron, through the trophic influences of its axon and collaterals, governs the histochemical properties of its fibers. The plasticity of mus-cle fibers allows conversion from one histochemical type to the other when there is reinnervation by a motor neuron of has altered the normal checkerboard staining profile. zone surrounded by a rim of increased enzyme activity. the opposite type. Along with type grouping, target fibers are pathognomonic of denervation. Despite their unique specificity, regrettably bona fide target fibers are present in less than 25% of cases of neu-rogenic atrophy Although targets and cores are similar mor-phologically, they differ in three ways. Although both tend to occur singly within a fiber, the target is larger in diam-eter. The target is limited in length, only extending across a few sarcomeres, in contrast to the core, which may run the entire length of the fiber. Most important is the three-zone architecture of the target fiber. The central zone, indistinguishable at the ultrastructural level from the unstructured core, is surrounded by an intermediate zone that forms an intensely stained rim in oxidative enzyme reac-tions. By definition, the intermediate zone, difficult to iden-tify in most other stains, is absent from a core. Itis a zone of transition between the central zone of severe sarcoplasmic disruption and the third zone, which represents the normal portion of the muscle fiber. Targetoid fibers, which lack the intermediate zone of increased oxidative enzyme activity, are morphologically identical to core fibers. The term core is conventionally used in cases of congenital central core disease, and the term targetoid is applied to cores that are found in any other condition. In our experience, targetoid fibers are more commonly encountered in neurogenic atro-phy than any other condition and are more frequently seen than target fibers.