The sclera, which accounts for approximately five-sixths of the surface area of the eye, begins at the periphery of the cornea and extends posteriorly to the optic nerve. The sclera's relatively rigid nature protects the eye from trauma and helps maintain intraocular pressure. Anteriorly, the sclera is visible underneath the transparent conjunctiva and is normally white in adults. The sclera varies in thickness, being about 0.8 mm thick near its junction with the cor-nea. At the insertions of the four rectus muscles (approxi-mately 5 to 8 mm posterior to the corneoscleral junction), the sclera is at its thinnest, measuring approximately 0.3 mm. From this point posteriorly, the sclera gradually thickens and attains its maximal width of about 1.0 mm adjacent to the optic nerve. The sclera has three components: the episclera, the stroma, and the lamina fusca. The episclera, its most superficial part, is located between the fibrous structure that envelops the globe and the underly-ing scleral stroma with which it merges. The episclera is composed of loosely arranged collagen fibers and fibroblasts embedded in an extracellular matrix. Occasional melano-cytes and mononuclear leukocytes are also present. Anteri-orly, the episclera is richly vascularized. The largest component of the sclera is its stroma, which consists of fibrous bands of collagen, occasional elastic fibers, and scattered fibroblasts. The corneal and scleral stroma appear similar at the light microscopic level, but when viewed by transmission electron micros-copy, the individual collagen fibers within the sclera vary in diameter and are randomly arranged, in contrast to the orderly packed corneal collagen fibers of uniform diameter. This largely accounts for the opaque nature of the sclera. Although the scleral stroma is relatively avascular, blood vessels, as well as accompanying nerves and scattered mela-nocytes, are present in perforating emissarial canals (Fig-ure 13.8). The anterior ciliary arteries perforate the sclera near the insertion of the rectus muscles. Venous channels draining the iris, ciliary body, and choroid exit the sclera several millimeters posterior to the equator of the eye. The posterior ciliary arteries pass through the sclera near the optic nerve. In some individuals, a nerve in lagen fibers in haphazard array that vary in diameter. Scattered fibro-blasts occur between the collagen bundles. an emissarial canal near the corneoscleral junction may be prominent and attain a diameter of 1 to 2 mm. The nodular appearance of this so-called "nerve loop ofAxenfeld" may mimic a neoplasm or conjunctival cyst clinically. To the unwary surgical pathologist, this totally normal nerve bun-dle may be mistaken for a neurofibroma. The innermost layer of the sclera, the lamina fusca, contains loose collagen fibers, fibroblasts, and scattered melanocytes. It represents a region of transition between the sclera and the underlying choroid. The sclera is weakly attached to the choroid below by thin fibers of collagen. With increasing age, several histologic changes occur in the sclera. Calcium may deposit diffusely between the indi-vidual collagen fibers throughout the entire scleral stroma. Localized abnormalities, known as senile scleral plaques, may occur just anterior to the insertion of the lateral or horizontal rectus muscles. These lesions are characterized sclera and extends to the prominently vascularized choroid through an emissarial canal. Pigmented melanocytes are also present. The fibers of the inferior oblique muscle are present at site of insertion upon the outer sclera.by decreased stromal cellularity, abnormal collagen, and, in advanced cases, calcification.