Fat Necrosis Three histologically distinct types of fat necrosis exist: The ordinary variety secondary to trauma and other inflamma-tion, which associated with pancreatitis, and infarction of fat. Histologically, ordinary fat necrosis is typified by the presence of epithelioid histiocytes, foamy macrophages, and giant cells in adipose tissue, often surrounding and isolating individual adipocytes. Lymphocytes and plasma cells are also found in small numbers. Occa-sionally, unusual crystalloids may be seen. Fat cells become destroyed, and the released lipid may fuse to result in a single droplet larger than the average cell or in minute droplets. This process may resolve with mild fibrosis or, if extensive, may cause cyst formation with eventual dense fibrosis and even calcification at the periphery. Such cysts with central liquefaction may be located on the buttocks and be the final result of trauma, secondary to an injection. Just beneath the cyst wall, necrotic outlines of adipocytes are usually present, signifying the origin of the end-stage cyst in fat necrosis. An unusual type of fat necrosis forming cystic spaces has been designated membranous fat necrosis by Poppiti et al In this example, actual cysts are formed that contain pseudopapillary structures and central debris. Although the fat cell outlines are normal in appearance, the formation of these cysts resembles that seen in mem-branous lipodystrophy. Membranous fat necrosis can also occur secondary to radiation therapy. Fat necrosis secondary to acute pancreatitis is histologi-cally distinctive. Rather than consisting of a histiocytic infiltrate, the pancreatic fat necrosis is accom-panied by an infiltrate of neutrophils predominantly, and giant cells surround a large lipid vacuole formed by fusion of destroyed adipocytes. Scattered lymphocytes and monocytes occupy expanded spaces between cells at top. Fat necrosis, pancreatic type. In contrast to regular fat necrosis, numerous neutrophils are found, together with central liquefaction. The central material may give either an eosinophilic or baso-philic appearance, and disrupted cell membranes can be appreciated. liquefaction of fat is apparent. In the center of the lesion, the infarctlike outlines of fat cells can be seen, and fat cell membranes are ruptured, releasing their con-tents into a central eosinophilic or basophilic material. The entire region is bordered by an acute inflammatory infil-trate. The process is thought to be secondary to the action of pancreatic lipolytic enzymes in the serum acting on sus-ceptible foci. The infarction type of fat necrosis, in which eosino-philic outlines of fat cells without nuclei or inflammation are present histologically, may be seen in lipomas and in detached peritoneal tissue originating from appendices epiploicae. The lipomas containing infarction may be pedunculated with twisting, causing compromise of blood flow. Calciphylaxis Another disorder that often manifests itself as skin and subcutaneous fat necrosis is called "calciphylaxis"; here, the characteristic vascular necrosis with calcium precipita-tion will aid in the diagnosis. It is a painful and often lethal complication of dialysis and renal failure. Small vessels show mural calci-fication and necrosis, along with thrombosis and necrosis of surrounding tissues. In some cases, an association with primary hyperparathyroidism has been reported. Panniculitis Numerous diseases and conditions may cause an inflamma-tory infiltrate of the subcutaneous adipose tissue, namely, a panniculitis; readers are referred to various textbooks on skin pathology for an in-depth enumeration of these. Only a few relevant points are made here. First, the con-dition called Weber-Christian disease, or febrile nodular nonsuppurative panniculitis of the subcutaneous fat, was described early in this century and is consistently referred to in discussions of this topic. However, it became clear in the 1960s and 1970s that this disease was not a clini-cally distinct entity but rather had many separate etiologies, including steroid withdrawal, diabetes mellitus, tubercu-losis, pancreatic disease, and systemic lupus erythemato-sus. Thus, it is generally agreed today that Weber-Christian "disease" was a clinical description of a presenta-tion for numerous diseases and is a term to be avoided. Panniculitis, as a rule, can be divided into those that are septal and those that involve the lobules of adipose tis-sue. The character of the infiltrate is important, and note should be made of the presence of eosinophils, neutrophils and granulomas, histiocytes with lympho-phagocytosis, or other specific changes. Autoim-mune diseases such as scleroderma and lupus may be causative, indicating the importance of historical detail. Unusual causes, such as a-I-antitrypsin deficiency, have a characteristic histology, as does pancreatic fat necrosis. Even withdrawal from steroids may cause panniculitis. Mesenteritis Inflammation of the mesenteric fat is a recognizable clinical entity that has more recently been termed mesenteric pan-niculitis to signify the active inflammatory stage and retrac-tile mesenteritis to signify the fibrotic stage. Other terms complicate the literature, but it is generally held that they all refer to the same disease process and spectrum: Liposclerotic mesenteritis, sclerosing mesenteritis, ML, and Weber-Christian disease of the mesentery [see recent review by Kelly and Hwang]. The process consists of a chronic inflammatory infiltrate of lymphocytes, plasma cells, foamy histiocytes, and giant cells, along with recognizable fat necrosis, edema, and a variable amount of fibrosis and calcification. Myofibroblasts proliferate and are directly involved in the pathogenesis of the retractile disease. While it most often thickens the mesentery, it can appear as a single tume-faction at the mesenteric base or as multiple discrete nodules. Other space-occupying lesions, such as inflammatory pseudotumors, xanthogranu-lomatosis, and fibromatosis, are in the differen-tial diagnosis. Affected patients are usually middle-aged and predominantly male, and they complain of vague abdominal discomfort and weight loss, with more than one-half presenting with fever. Nearly one-half of them are, oddly enough, asymptomatic. Rare cases have beenfatal, but the prognosis is generally excellent. Mass lesions regress within 2 years in about two-thirds of the patients, and any pain disappears in three-quarters of them. Steroids are commonly given to treat the disease, but it is unclear whether the course of the disease or the progres-sion to fibrosis is changed. Retroperitoneal xanthogranulomatosis can be due to a primary inflammatory process of the kidney, or it can rep-resent involvement of the retroperitoneum by the mesen-teritis. Many foamy histiocytes and lymphocytes are seen. Rarely, it can be associated with Erdheim-Chester disease (multisystem fibroxanthomas with bone pain and sclerotic bone lesions). Lipogranuloma Small collections of epithelioid histiocytes with lipid drop-lets are commonly encountered in lymph nodes, draining the gastrointestinal tract (mesenteric, porta hepatis, retro-peritoneal), and in the liver, spleen, and bone marrow. They do not imply a pancreatitis (in which necrosis should be present) or other pathologic process and are completely incidental.