The most common artifacts are related to unsuspected or inadvertent injury to the muscle specimen in vivo (precol-lection phase), to collection and processing errors such as Needle tract. Area of injury contains necrotic fibers and a small focus of lymphocytic inflammation. irreverent handling at the time of removal, or to improper tissue sectioning and staining. When they are linear in configuration, needle tracts, such as those produced dur-ing electromyography studies, may easily be rec-ognized. More often, needle tracts are cut tangentially so that the pathologist may be misled by a histologic picture of myopathy exemplified by fiber necrosis, regeneration, inflammation, and interstitial fibrosis. This kind of pre collection artifact is generally traceable to poor communication between the physician requesting the biopsy and the individual performing the procedure, who is unaware of the previous intramuscular injections. In an uncommon but very misleading collection error, large numbers of neutrophils are occasionally observed within the intramuscular blood vessels. These cells may be marginated and may have begun to penetrate the vascular walls to enter the perimysium or endomysium, simulat-ing an acute vasculitis. In the absence of other pathologic changes within the specimen, the presence of neutrophils, which is extremely rare in a muscle biopsy, usually means that the muscle has been tortured by crushing or squeez-ing by an inexperienced hand during the biopsy procedure. Even with the best technical expertise available, muscle tis-sue is sufficiently fragile that most laboratories find some vacuolization of muscle fibers produced during freezing is unavoidable in 10 to 20% of specimens. Vacuolization can be minimized by using proper techniques that permit rapid freezing and by proper specimen storage to prevent thaw-ing. Mild vacuolar artifacts may be tolerable, but large vacu-oles that disrupt the sarcoplasm are especially troublesome. Larger vacuoles may interfere with accurate biopsy interpretation by distorting the pathologic changes in the sample or by simulating the picture of vacuolar myop-athy, such as glycogen or lipid storage disease. Muscle that is unprotected by isometric clamping during collection is vulnerable to contraction artifact. During uncontrolled con-traction, a series of segmental contractions occur along the length of the muscle fiber as the contractile elements are pulled beyond the confines of their respective sarcomeres. This phenomenon is best observed in longitudinal sections ous clear holes to form within the fibers. where dark hypercontracted regions are punctuated by pale, ghostlike zones of myofibrillar disruption. In transverse orientation, these disrupted segments are seen as irregular fissures in the sarcoplasm. Contraction artifact is particularly undesirable when electron microscopic stud-ies are needed, even if the artifact is subtle and cannot be appreciated at the light microscopic level. The detection of ultrastructural abnormalities, which is dependent on the normal alignment of the myofibrils and myofilaments, is compromised by the distortion of sarcomeric structures. Tissue within the teeth of the clamp is sometimes submit-ted for processing. This tissue, if not entirely crushed and easily recognized as such, may be compressed, producing an artifact that looks like fiber atrophy. A clue to artifact is the difference in fiber diameters in the rest of the biopsy specimen and the clamped fibers, all of which are uniformly small and angular. Finally, for those who use powered gloves in specimen handling, tiny talc granules may be seen on the microscopic section. These may be mistaken for inclusions zones offiber disruption are seen in longitudinally oriented fibers.or polyglucosan bodies within the fibers. Polarization of the talc will quickly dispel this notion. Excessively pale histochemical reactions can result from the degradation of enzyme systems in the sarcoplasm. Artifacts are distinguished from legitimate abnormal stain-ing if all histochemical reactions in the biopsy are pale. In our experience, this artifact is most often attributable to delayed freezing of the specimen because of a delay in transport. Laboratories that accept consultation specimens from institutions other than their own should be aware of this problem in order to reduce the time required for trans-portation. In specimens shipped in ice, melting ice leaves the tissue in water producing excess fluid within the endo-mysium and perimysium simulating edema. Moreover, this hypotonic fluid produces a rat bite effect in some fibers, the result of which is a peripheral irregular defect in the fiber looking like a bite has been taken out of the sarcoplasm. Other artifacts are due to sectioning and staining errors. Of unknown origin is nuclear vacuolization, which seems to occur in frozen sections rather than paraffin sections. Scattered nuclei have peripherally margin-ated chromatin. The center of the nuclei is clear or light pink in H&E stains. The color, greater frequency, and size distinguish this artifact from most pathologic intranuclear inclusions. A disfiguring and distracting artifact occurs in frozen sections stained with RTC. The normal green stain-ing of the tissue is distorted by irregular red-stained areas that interfere with interpretation of a biopsy. This seems to be more common in specimens shipped in ice when the ice melts, leaving the exposed fresh tissue floating in water. Dark staining of the sarcoplasm in random fibers is often due to variations in section thickness. Fibers adja-cent to the connective tissue of the perimysium are espe-cially susceptible to this artifact. Inconsistencies of section thickness may be recognized when linear, bandlike regions of intense staining are visible within muscle fibers. Another small and round with a thick collar of chromatin as opposed to true intranuclear inclusions. tions stained with trichrome. The internal detail of the sarcoplasm is distorted by a red discoloration of the normal green staining properties of the fibers. sectioning artifact involves wrinkling or folding of the fiber especially evident in ATPase reactions. The exact cause of this phenomenon sometimes called the pie crust artifact is unclear, but it has been attributed to cov-erslip lifting or to improper transfer of cryostat sections to the slide. A troublesome staining problem occurs with the Gomori RTC in frozen sections. A fine granular or linear precipitate of phosphotungstic acid can mimic nemaline rods, except that this artifact can be seen in the endomy-sium and perimysium between fibers.