Embryology The middle ear space develops from invagination of the first branchial pouch from the primi-tive pharynx. The Eustachian tube and the tympanic cavity develop from the endoderm of the first branchial pouch; elastic fibers in the auricular cartilage. lowing layers may be distinguished from right to left: Stratified squa-mous epithelium, lamina propria, radial arrangement of collagenous fibers, circular arrangement of collagenous fibers (ie, at right angles to former layer), lamina propria, and middle ear epithelium. brane as determined by serial photography of dye markings. The tym-panic membrane and adjacent deep external canal epithelium are depicted as being viewed on face. Two discrete pathways are present: A.Passing upward along a tongue of epithelium over the handle of the malleus to join epithelium moving in a posterosuperior direction over the pars flaccida region izone 1).B.A radial pathway moving centrifu-gally from the pars flaccida and handle of malleus regions to the periph-erytzone 2). The times given for each region are the weeks required for the dye to be completely cleared from that region.the malleus and the incus develop from the mesoderm of the first branchial arch while the stapes develops from the mesoderm of the second branchial arch. ANATOMY The middle ear or the tympanic cavity lies within the tem-poral bone between the tympanic membrane and the squamous portions of the temporal bone laterally and the petrous portion of the temporal bone surrounding the inner ear medially. The anatomic limits of the tympanic cavity include: lateral or internal aspect made up by the tympanic membrane and squamous portion of the tempo-ral bone, medial aspect bordered by the petrous por-tion of the temporal bone, superior delimited by the tegmen tympani, a thin plate of bone which separates the middle ear space from the cranial cavity, inferior aspect bordered by a thin plate of bone separating the tympanic cavity from the superior bulb of the internal jugular vein, anterior aspect delimited by a thin plate of bone separating the tympanic cavity from the carotid canal housing the internal carotid artery, and posterior aspect delimited by the petrous portion of the temporal bone containing the mastoid antrum and mastoid air cells. The tympanic cavity communicates anteriorly with the nasopharynx by way of the Eustachian (auditory or pharyngotympanic) tube and it communicates posteri-orly with the mastoid air cells by way of the aditus and mastoid antrum. The contents of the tympanic cavity include the ossicles, the ligaments of the ossicles, the tendons of the ossicular muscles, the Eustachian tube, the tympanic cavity proper, the epitympanic recess, the mastoid cavity, and the chorda tympani of the facial nerve. The middle ear as well as the external ear functions as conduits for sound conduction for the auditory part of the internal ear. Lateral Wall The tympanic cavity extends above the level of the tym-panic membrane as the epitympanic recess. The head of the malleus and the body of the short process of the incus lie in this area. The epitympanic recess projects later-ally above the external acoustic meatus; it is this portion of the tympanic cavity that has a part of the squamous portion of the temporal bone as its lateral wall. Roof The roof of the tympanic cavity is the tegmen tympani, a thin plate of bone separating the middle ear cavity from the cranial cavity. In children, the unossified petrosqua-mous suture of the tegmen tympani may allow the direct passage of infection from the middle ear to the meninges panic membrane. Dye is seen in the first photograph on the day at which it was daubed, just anterior and inferiorto the lateral process ofthe malleus. In the next photograph, taken 9 days later, it has moved posteriorly and superiorly to lie over that structure. Thirteen days later, in the third photograph, it has crossed the pars flaccida region, moving in the same direction toward the external canal. of the middle cranial fossa. In adults, especially in the setting of a long-standing history of chronic otitis media, compromise of the tegmen tympani, an already thin plate of bone may result in acquired encephalocele, in which glial-type tissue is present within the middleear cavity. In addition, in adults, veins from the middle ear perforate the petrosquamous suture to end in the petrosquamous sinus and the superior petrosal sinus and may potentially transmit infection directly to the cranial venous sinuses. malleus region on the sixth day after its deposition, in the first photograph. By the fifteenth day, in the second photograph, a round dot that was just posterior to the handle of the malleus has separated and is commenc-ing to travel backward, the main mass of dye moving discretely upward along the handle of the malleus. This process has advanced on the twenty-seventh day in the third photograph, the posterior dye having reached the back edge of the tympanic membrane and the large mass being now situated across the pars flaccida at an angle that has now changed to a posterosuperior one. Floor The floor of the tympanic cavity is usually a thin plate of bone separating the cavity from the internal jugular vein. In the pres-ence of a large superior bulb of the internal jugular vein, it may bulge into the middle ear and may present dehiscences. Posterior Wall The posterior wall of the tympanic cavity opens through the narrow aditus ad antrum in the wider mastoid antrum. Below the aditus is a relatively thin bone separat-ing the tympanic cavity from the antrum and it is from this posterior wall that the pyramidal eminence projects with an aperture at its apex from which the tendon of the stapedius muscle is transmitted. Above and behind the pyramidal eminence, the facial nerve curves downward to change its course from horizontal to vertical. The chorda tympani, aris-ing from the facial nerve, then enters the tympanic cavity through the canaliculus of the chorda in the posterior wall. Anterior Wall The lower part of the anterior wall is part of the petrous apex. This area consists of a thin plate of bone, which may be incomplete or may contain air cells, separating the cavity from the carotid canal in which the internal carotid artery is located. The upper part of the anterior wall is deficient since the canal containing the tensor tympani muscle opens in this location and immediately below this area is the tym-panic orifice of the auditory tube. Medial Wall The medial wall of the tympanic cavity is the petrous por-tion of the temporal bone surrounding the internal ear and separating the middle ear cavity and the inner ear cavity. Epitympanic recess , Malleus _,/ "-""'"--Incus Vestibule External meatus and tympanic membrane ASeveral markings of importance are found on its surface including the broad prominence produced by the anterior end of the lateral semicircular canal, the prominence of the facial canal produced by the horizontal portion of the facial nerve in its course between the inner and mid-dle ears. The cochleariform process transmits the tendon of the tensor tympani muscle. Its apex is the landmark for the position of the turn between the anterolaterally and posteriorly directed horizontal por-tions of the facial nerve. Immediately below the facial canal is the fossula fenestrae vestihuli also referred to as the sta-pes niche, which contains the oval window, closed by the base of the stapes. Below the oval window is the promon-tory formed by the basal turn of the cochlea. The tympanic nerve plexus lies on the promontory. Below the back part of the promontory, the cochlear fossula or round window niche leads to the round window or fenestrae cochlea. Behind the promontory is a depression referred to as the sinus tym-pani, a site that may harbor infections and may transmit infections to the ampullary end of the posterior canal and posterior end of the lateral canal if the infection is deeply situated. MIDDLE EAR OSSICLES AND MUSCLES The middle ear bones or ossicles include the malleus, the incus, and the stapes. The parts of the mal-leus include a head, upper and lower manubria, lateral process, and anterior process. The malleus is closely attached to the tympanic membrane by its manubrium and its lateral process, while its head projects above the epitympanic recess to articulate with the body of Superior mallear ligament '-.~~Short crus of incus \ BAnterior mallear (? ~"-"!:~l--. ~~~. ligament and precess":" ( Chorda tympani.'-":- t. Long crus of _ --Manubrium ----through approximately 90 0)andB.medial aspect. the incus. The anterior process of the malleus extends obliquely downward from the neck toward the tympanosquamous fissure. In infants, the ante-rior process may reach the tympanosquamous fissure, but in adults, the distal part is transformed to connective tissue forming the anterior ligament of the malleus. The mal-leus is also attached to the tympanic wall by superior and lateral mallear ligaments. The lateral ligament attaches the neck of the malleus to the margin of the tympanic notch. The parts of the incus include its body, long and short processes. The body of the incus is fitted against the head of the malleus, and lies in the epitympanic recess. The short process rests in a depression referred to as the fossa of the incus that is situated in the posterior wall of the tympanic cavity below the aditus ad antrum. The long process of the incus descends parallel and slightly posteromedial to the manubrium, of the malleus, but at its lower end turns medial to articulate with the stapes. The incus is held in place by a posterior ligament that attaches to its short process, and by a superior ligament to attach to the body The knob-like expansion of the long crus of the incus (at the incudomalleal joint) is referred to as the lenticular process. The stapes is formed by its two crura, a head that lies at the junction of the crura and a footplate that lies on the oval window. The head of the stapes articu-lates with the incus. From its articulation with the incus, the stapes passes almost horizontally to the oval window. The footplate of the stapes is attached to the oval window by the annular ligament. The latter, a ring of elastic fibers, allows movement of the stapes but seals any potential space between its footplate and the edges of the oval window. The incudomalleolar and incudostapedial joints are synovial. In addition to their liga-ments, the stapes and the manubrium of the malleus have head, two crura and footplate.muscles attached to them. The stapedius muscle dimin-ishes the excursion of the base of the stapes by its reflex contraction. Important functions ascribed to the stapedius muscle are to protect the inner ear from excessive sound and to improve discrimination for higher frequencies in speech. The stapedius muscle is innervated by a branch of the facial nerve. The tensor tympani muscle draws the manubrium medi-ally thereby tightening the tympanic membrane. The tensor tympani muscle is not only felt to primarily protect against excessive noise but also functions in conjunction with the tensor veli palatini muscle, to respond to swallowing and electric stimulation from the tongue. The action of these two muscles pump air from the tympanic cavity into the Eustachian tube forcing air into the nasopharynx and help-ing to open the isthmus. The tensor tympani muscle is innervated by a branch of the mandibular nerve. EUSTACHIAN TUBE The Eustachian tube extends from its tympanic ostium high on the anterior wall of the tympanic cavity to a nasopharyn-geal ostium situated posterior to the inferior nasal concha. The tube is not straight but slightly S shaped. In adults, the tympanic ostium is approximately 2 to 2.5 em higher than the nasopharyngeal end; the tube runs downward, medially and anteriorly to the nasopharynx. The length of the tube in adults varies from 31 to 38 mm. In infants, the tube is shorter, relatively wider, and more horizontal in its course and, therefore, an easier pathway for infections ascending from the nasopharynx to the tympanic cavity The tube can be divided into an osseous portion and a cartilaginous portion. The osseous portion or the canal has a bony wall and is the lateral or tympanic third of the tube. The anteromedial two-thirds have a cartilaginous and con-nective tissue wall and are referred to as the cartilaginous portion of the tube. The cartilaginous and osseous tubes meet at an obtuse angle. HISTOLOGY Tympanic Cavity Proper Histologically, the epithelial lining of the tympanic cavity is a single layer of respiratory epithelium of flattened to cuboidal epithelium. Under normal condi-tions' there are no glandular elements within the middle ear; the presence of glandular epithelium in the middle ear is abnormal (see below under Selected Abnormalities and Pathol-ogy). Further, stratified squamous epithelium is not present in the tympanic cavity under normal conditions nor does squamous metaplasia occur in the middle ear. Ciliated pseudo stratified columnar epithelium may be found in lim-ited patches among the flattened or the cuboidal epithelium. layer of epithelium. Under normal conditions glands are not identified within the tympanic cavity. Eustachian Tube The lining of the Eustachian tube is a low ciliated epithelium from much of its length except as it approaches its nasopharyngeal end where it becomes cili-ated pseudostratified columnar epithelium containing gob-let cells. In its cartilaginous portion, it also contains sero-mucinous glands. The Eustachian tubes contain a lymphoid component, particularly in children, that is referred to as Gerlach's tubal tonsil. Reactive hyperplasia of this lymphoid component particu-larly in children may close off the Eustachian tube provid-ing a desirable milieu for otitis media. The mucosa of the osseous portion of the Eustachian tube is separated from the carotid canal by a thin plate of bone measuring 1 mm in thickness. Dehiscence of the carotid canal is fairly frequent. Squamous carcinoma of the middle ear or Eustachian tube, a rare occurrence, may easily penetrate this area and gain access to the carotid artery with the potential for widespread dissemination. The cartilage cinous glands. Mucosa of Eustachian tube. The lining is of ciliated columnar epithelium. In the lamina propria beneath, there are numer-ous lymphocytes, which are probably the result of inflammation. of the nasopharyngeal portion of the Eustachian tube is of hyaline type. Mastoid Air Cells The mastoid air cells represent a network of intercommu-nicating spaces that emanate from the tympanic cavity. Each air cell is lined by flattened to cuboidal epithelium which rests on periosteum that covers a thin frame of lamel-lar bone. Pneumatization of the Temporal Bone In the newborn, the rudimentary mastoid bone contains a single air space, the antrum, surrounded by diploic bone containing hematopoietic elements. As the mastoid process develops, the marrow spaces hollow out. The mesenchymal component occupying the space is resorbed and the developing air-containing cells become lined by the advancing endodermal epithelium. The mastoid pro-cess is constantly pneumatized in adults, although not in infants. The cells grow out from the antrum, as well as from each other forming complex interlocking chains of thin-walled cavities opening into each other. The antrum apparently always has air cells; the mastoid process is usually one of several types including pneumatized (con-taining air cells), diploic, mixed, or sclerotic. Approxi-mately 80% of mastoid is well pneumatized by the age of 3 or 4 but in approximately 20% of the people, normal pneumatization fails to occur. Middle Ear Ossicles The middle ear ossicles develop from cartilage with a single center of ossification for bone; there is no epiphyseal ossi-the osseous portion of the external canal. Note the thin covering of skin over the external ear canal and the proximity of bone to it. B. Higher magnification shows the very thin epithelium of the mastoid air cells rest-ing on periosteum covering lamellar bone. fication. The persistence of cartilage in each of the ossicles and the bifurcation of the stapes to form the crura with the obturator foramen between them distinguish the middle ear ossicles from other long bones. The head of the stapes is formed of endochondral bone with a cartilaginous cap at the incudostapedial joint. The crura of the stapes are formed of periosteal bone only. From the middle ear aspect of the stapes footplate to its vestibu-lar surface, the histologic findings include the flattened to cuboidal epithelium of the tympanic cavity, a thin layer of bone, cartilage, and a single flattened epi-thelial cell layer. The malleus and the incus, similar to long bones, have an outer covering of periosteal bone layer and an inner core of endochondral bone with well-formed haversian systems. The manubrium of the malleus is predominantly covered by retained cartilage rather than periosteal bone. The entire inner core of the manubrium, as well as the rest anterior process is formed in the membrane early in fetal life and merges with the malleus after its formation. At its superior aspect, the manubrium is separated from the tympanic membrane by a ligament covered by the middle ear epithelium. The short process of the incus shows a tip of the unossihed cartilage. Middle Ear Joints Both the incudomalleal and incudostapedial joints are diarthrodial. Middle ear epithelium is present on the outer surface of the joint capsule and synovial membrane is pres-ent on its inner surface. The joint capsule is composed of fibrous tissue with a high elastic fiber content. The artic-ular disc representing the space in between the articular ends is comprised predominantly of fibrocartilage . The articular processes of both the malleus and the incus are covered by cartilage. middle ear above, there is a thin layer of bone. Belowthis, the footplate consists of cartilage and there is a basal flattened layer of cells com-prising the lining of the vestibule. pied by the fibrocartilage ofthe articular disc. B.Higher power, note one end of joint capsule and articular disc. The annular ligament binds the cartilaginous edge of the stapes footplate to the cartilaginous rim of the ves-tibular window and is composed of fibrous tissue with elastic fibers being prominent near the ligament surfaces. Cartilage also covers the articular surfaces of the stapediovestibular joints. v adjacent bony labyrinthine wall, and crus of stapes. The footplate shows a lamina of cartilage on its vestibular surface, which is continu-ous with the cartilage ofthe stapediovestibular joint. M, middle ear cav-ity; V, cavity of vestibule.The fissula ante fenestram is the canal linking the middle ear with the vestibule, lies in the bone just anterior to the stapediovestibular joint and develops as a slit filled with fibrous tissue often with associated cartilage . Middle Ear Muscles The muscles of the middle ear including the tensor tympani and stapedius muscles are composed of a central tendon formed by elastic tissue with muscle fibers radiating from it. This configuration has been described as feather shaped. The tensor tympani muscle has a prominent mature adipose tissue component which is believed to function as insulation for the cochlea against electric effects from its contraction. ing the middle ear with the vestibule and develops as a slit filled with fibrous tissue. . ". -:~ lo" • '.'~ v , . , ), ~ : I f " # - ~ ~ // •',' _, _. . " ~ , r \ ~ '- •-~'"-, (_ \ " fibers and fibrous bands between them radiate to a tendon.