The Nail Plate Microscopically, the nail plate consists of closely packed, adherent, interdigitating corneocytes lacking nuclei or organelles. Many intercellular links including tight, intermediate, and desmosomal junctions are present. The nail plate is made up of three lay-ers: A thin dorsal layer, a thick intermediate layer, and the ventral layer from the nail bed. The cells of the surface of the nail plate overlap, slanting from "proximal-dorsal todistal-volar." For this reason, the dorsal surface of the nail plate is smooth, whereas the palmar surface is irregular, showing longitudinal striations. This can also be observed with optical microscopy, as well as with scanning electron microscopy and x-ray microdiffraction. With this latter technique, Garson et al. demonstrated three different layers in the nail plate characterized by differ-ent orientations of the keratin molecules from the outer to the inner side of human nail. These layers were associated with the histologic dorsal, intermediate, and ventral plates. The hair-like type alpha-keratin filaments (81 Ain diam-eter) are only present in the intermediate layer (account-ing for approximately two-thirds of the nail width) and are perfectly oriented perpendicular to the growth axis, in the nail plane. Keratin filaments of stratum corneum (epider-mis) type, found in the dorsal and ventral cells, are oriented in two privileged directions; parallel and perpendicular to the growth axis. This "sandwich" structure in the corneo-cytes and the strong intercellular junctions gives the nail high mechanical rigidity and hardness, both in the curva-ture direction and in the growth direction. Lipid bilayers parallel to the nail surface fill certain ampul-lar dilations of the dorsal plate and intercellular spaces in the ventral plate. Using x-ray microdiffraction, they also showed that onychomycosis disrupts the keratin structure, probably during the synthesis phase. No keratohyalin gran-ules were seen, but acidophilic masses, called pertinax bod-ies of Lewis and Montgomery, are occasionally seen in older age groups. Hamilton et al. believed that the progressive increase in the thickness of the nail plate with age is attributable Proximal nail fold: Dorsal portion Proximal nail fold: Ventral portion Nail bed: Ventral matrix Intermediate matrix to the increasing size of the cells in the plate, consecutive to the frictional loss of nail; however, Johnson and Shuster studied in 20 normal great toenails the determinant of final nail thickness and length at its point of detachment at the onychodermal band. They confirmed that the increase of nail thickness with age is independent of the frictional traumatisms on the plate. Cutting tests showed that frac-ture of the nail plate occurred because the energy to cut nails transversely, at approximately 3 kJ m- 2,was about half that neededto cut them longitudinally. Corneocytes of the human nail plate have been studied by German et al Corneocytes of the dorsal nail plates of normal nails are irregular and polyhedral, nonnucleated, and show distinctly irregular networks. These horny cells from nail plates increase in size with age: Babies have small cells, adults have significantly larger cells, and aged subjects have significantly larger cells than the adults. These authors also commented that the faster-than-normal-growing nail plates yield smaller cells; for example, corneocytes from pso-riatic patients are smaller than normal, whereas corneocytes from slow-growing nails, such as from persons having lichen planus or dyskeratosis congenita, are larger than normal. Frequent gap junctions were observed near the area where lamellar granules were discharging their contents, and it was suggested that a certain substance might be able to pass through the nail plate through such intercel-lular channels. Perhaps such channels explain the greater permeability of the nail plate to polar molecules compared with the permeability of the skin. The water content of human nail plates have been determined using a portable near-infrared spectrometer with an InGaAs photodiode array detector and PLS regression by Egawa et al Chemical composition shows that a normal nail con-tains 18% water. Aquaporins are being studied in the nails, but their expression is not concluded up to now. Transonychial water loss in vivo have been studied by Nuutinen et al These authors have demonstrated that TOWL values decrease with age and patients with eczema, psoriasis, and onychomycosis have significantly lowered TOWL values compared with healthy subjects. The biochemical composition of the nail plate has been widely studied. Calcium, found as the phosphate in hydroxyapatite crystals, is an important component of the nail plate; it is intracellularly bound to phospholipids, particularly in the dorsal and ventral nail plates. Cal-cium concentration is approximately 0.1 % of the weight, 10 times greater than that in hair. However, some authors believe that the proportion of calcium in the nail contrib-utes little to the hardness of the nail plate in men. Also, it is possible that calcium is not an intrinsic part of the nail but is incorporated from extrinsic sources, such as soaps; the nail is relatively porous and calcium could enter as ionic calcium or bound to fatty acids. Other metals such as copper, manganese, zinc, and iron are also found in small quantities in the nail plate, although their function is still unknown. Lipids are also an important componentof the nail plate. Helmdach et al. have demonstrated that nail plate lipid composition varies with age and sex: The lipid composition of the fertile years shows distinct profiles compared to that of childhood and old age, suggest-ing an influence of sex hormones on nail lipogenesis. The existence of sulfhydryl and disulfide groups has been demonstrated in the nail plate. During early embry-onic life, there is a very high concentration of the sulfhydryl groups, which decreases as the delivery date approaches and stabilizes at about the age of 3 years. These sul-furous radicals are formed at the expense of amino acids, such as cystine. Quantification of cysteine and cystine can be performed by hydrolysis. Total sulfur concentration is similar in the dorsal and intermediate plates. The nail plate also contains glutamic acid, serine, and less tyrosine than hair. In certain diseases, the quantity of various organic and metallic components of the nail plate can be increased. A brief listing is presented for reference: Total nonprotein nitrogen, urea nitrogen, ammonia nitrogen, and uric acid in gout, creatinine in chronic renal failure, sodium in cystic fibrosis, calcium in older subjects, copper in Wilson's disease, arsenic as biomarker to arsenic exposure in the endemic areas, and morphine, 6-acetylmorphine, and cocaine in drug abusers. An analysis of the keratin of the nail plate revealed the following: alpha-fibrillar, low sulfur protein; globular, high sulfur matrix protein; and high glycine-tyrosine-rich matrix protein. All these fractions are also present in hair. The hardness of nail is due to the high sulfur matrix protein, contrasting with the relatively soft keratin of the epidermis. The nail plate completely blocked the UV-B light and only a minimal amount of UV-A light penetrated the nails. If UV is required to directly penetrate the nail to treat nail bed psoriasis, then these data suggest that therapeutic effi-cacy may be compromised by the intervening nail plate. This minimal penetration of UV-A light may explain why therapies such as psoralen-UV-A have low efficacy for the treatment of nail psoriasis. Thus, it appeared that this free radical generation was fundamental in facili-tating the redox-mediated keratin disruption of the ungual membrane. Proximal Nail Fold The proximal nail fold is an invaginating, wedge-shaped fold of the skin on the dorsum of the distal digit, and the nail plate arises from under this fold. The proxi-mal nail fold consists of two layers of epidermis: The ventral portion overlying the newly formed nail plate and the dorsal portion that forms the dorsum of the finger epidermis. The keratinization process in both portions does not differ from that of the epidermis elsewhere, possessing a granular layer that is absent in all parts of the nail matrix. The dorsal portion of the proximal nail fold consists of a continuation of the epidermis and dermis of the dorsal digit with identical histologic pattern to the skin of the dorsum of the distal digit; ventral portion, overlying the nail plate. Note the great thickness of the stratum corneum of this epithelium. with sweat glands, but no follicles or sebaceous glands. At the distal tip, a thick corneal layer called cuticle shows on the dorsal surface of the nail plate. Its func-tion is the protection of the nail base, particularly the ger-minative matrix. Loss of the cuticle often allows acute and chronic inflammatory and infective processes to involve the nail matrix, leading to secondary nail plate dystrophies. fold shows a thick corneal layer on the dorsal surface of the nail plate.The ventral portion is thick-skinned, has no append-ages, and is closely attached on the dorsal surface of the nail plate. The epithelium of the ventral surface of the proximal nail fold has been called eponychium. Diseases that affect the ventral portion of the proximal nail fold can affect the newly formed nail plate. For this reason, some authors think that the proximal nail fold contributes to form the superficial layer of the nail plate. In particular, the apparition of pits and grooves on the nail is due to parakeratotic and growth detention phenomena, respectively, in the ventral portion of the proximal nail fold. Matrix The ventral surface of the proximal nail fold forms the roof of the proximal nail groove; the nail matrix forms its floor, and the nail plate lies between the two. The matrix is divided into three parts: Dorsal, intermediate, and ventral. Of these, the dorsal and, above all, the intermediate portions play an important role in nail plate formation. In particular, the true matrix is the intermediate portion. For this reason, when we discuss the histology of the matrix, we are fundamentally referring to the intermediate portion. The ventral portion corresponds to the nail bed; the contro-versy about its participation in the formation of the defini-tive nail plate is discussed in "Nail Growth." The main body of the matrix is composed of epithe-lial cells, with melanocytes, Merkel cells, and Langerhans cells scattered among the epithelial cells. Epithelial Cells The matrix is an easily identified thick squamous epithe-lium, situated immediately below the ventral portion of the proximal nail fold. Its main feature is its thickness, with between 8 and 15 mamelons (protuber-ances). Its undulation can only be seen for a few millimeters, flattening itself in the area corresponding to the nail bed. As in the epidermis of the skin, the matrix possesses a very active germinative basal layer of immature basaloid cells, producing keratinocytes which differentiate, harden, die, and contribute to the nail plate. The nail plate is formed by a process that involves flattening of the basal cells of the matrix, fragmentation of nuclei, and condensation of the cell cytoplasm to form horny flat cells. An important histologic feature is the lack of granular layer. Acanthosis and papillomatosis are only seen in the nail unit in the matrix and, distally, in the hyponychium.