Melanocyte immunostains find a scarce number of mela-nocytes in the normal nail matrix. In this way, S-100, HMB-4S, and Melan-A may demonstrate isolated cells in this area. Tosti et al have studied the melanocyte characterization of the normal nail matrix, using immunohistochemistry techniques. These authors found nail matrix melanocytes reacted with the antibodies anti-PEP-I, anti-Pep-S, and anti-TMP-l, which recognize the tyrosinase-related protein-I, the tyrosinase-related protein-2, and the tyrosinase-related protein encoded by pMT4. This confirms that, even if normally quiescent, nail matrix melanocytes possess the key enzymes responsible for the formation of melanin pigment. Expression of integrins in the nail matrix has been studied by Cameli et al These authors found that alpha-2-beta-l and alpha- 3-beta-l expression differ in nail matrix epithelium. In the nail matrix, these integrins are not only expressed on the basal layer, but also on the fourth to fifth suprabasallayers, with suprabasal expression gradually decreasing from the distal to the proximal matrix. As in the normal human epidermis, alpha-L, '~100 alpha-4, and alpha-5 integrin subunits are not expressed in the nail matrix; in the same way, ICAM -1, the ligand of LFAl, was negative in the matrix cells. The expression of beta-l subunits in the suprabasal layers of the nail matrix indicates a very strong cohesion between nail matrix cells, this probably revealing them to be an essential prerequisite for the development of a compact nail plate. Cultures of nail matrix cells may represent a useful model to study the biologic properties of nail structure. Nail Matrix Antibody Reactive to Species Melanocytes Anti-PEP-l Tyrosinase-related Rabbit ++ protein-l Anti-PEP-8 Tyrosinase-related Rabbit + protein-2 (DOPA-chrome tautomerasa) HMB-45 Glycoconjugate present in Mouse ++ immature melanosomes TMH-l Tyrosinase-related protein Mouse + encoded by pMT4 "Tosti A, CameIi N, Piraccini BM, Fanti PA, Ortonne JP. Characterization of nail matrix melanocytes with anti-PEP1, anti-PEP8, TMH-1 and HMB-45 antibodies. JAm Acad Dermato/1994;31 :193-196.As melanocytes of the human pigmentary unit show deficient classical MHC class I expression, we investigated the HLA-NB/C expression on melanocytes in nail matrix. Melanocytes in the proximal nail fold and nail bed were strongly HLA-NB/C+. In contrast, proximal nail matrix melanocytes displayed no HLA-NB/C immu-noreactivity. This reflects the situation in the (MHC class I-negative) human hair follicle matrix and further supports the notion that the human nail matrix is a site of relative immune privilege. Comparable with the hair follicle, lack of MHC class I expression on nail melanocytes may pre-vent attacks by autoreactive CDS+ T cells on melanocyte-associated antigens in PNM. Collapse of nail immune privi-lege and a concomitant ectopic upregulation of MHC class I expression on nail melanocytes, for example, in patients with alopecia areata may expose melanocytes to immune recognition and cytotoxic autoimmune attack.