Normal Tissues Myofibroblasts were described in normal human and ani-mal tissues on the basis of ultrastructural and/or immuno-histochemical evidence of smooth muscle differentiation. The normal settings in which myofibroblasts were observed include the external theca of the rat ovarian follicle; developing human palatal mucosa; rat, rabbit, and human intestinal mucosa; rat and mouse adre-nal capsule, human, lamb, and monkey pulmonary alveolar septa; rat testicular stroma; rat testicu-lar capsule; human theca externa of the ovary; Wharton's jelly of human umbilical cord; bovine endometrial caruncle; and periodontal ligament of the mouse and rat, where they facilitate tooth eruption. Stromal cells with myoid features were also iden-tified in rat, mouse and human lymph nodes and in the human spleen. Another group of stromal cells with myoid features include hepatic perisinusoidal cells, those in the human uterine submucosa and human bone marrow, glomerular mesangial cells of mouse, rat, and human, and, possibly, pre- and postcapillary pericytes. Immunohistochemical studies disclosed heterogeneous cytoskeletal phenotypes among all of these stromal cells in terms of intermediate filament protein, smooth muscle actin, and smooth muscle myosin expres-sion; these include V,VD, VA M, VA, and VAD pheno-types. This cytoskeletal heterogeneity could reflect different functional needs since all of these stromal cells seem to participate in visceral contraction or extracellular matrix remodeling, a view supported by the observation that stromal cells with myoid features are generally present in discernible: L1, alterative; L2, exudative; L3, exudativo-productive; L4, cicatrizing (hematoxylin-phloxine-saf-fron). B. Most myofibroblasts from the exudative and exudativo-productive layer reveal intense immunostaining for o-srnooth muscle actin. Note that myofibroblastic cells change their orientation within the different layers. Within the exudative layer, their long axis is perpendicular to the surface, whereas in the exudativo-productive layer their long axis is often oblique to the surface. Within the cicatrizing layer, myofibroblastic cells are oriented parallel to the surface, which indicates that the modulation of cellular orientation serves to transmit contractile forces to effect wound closure. C.In the cicatrizing layer, numerous myofibroblasts express desmin. organs requiring contraction or high degrees of remodeling. Another interpretation proposes that most spindle cells in normal tissues cited as being myofibroblasts might be closer to pericytes, smooth muscle cells, or stro-mal cells with myoid features of variable degrees that corre-spond to functional demands. As shall be seen in the follow-ing sections, myofibroblasts and/or stromal cells with myoid features are not stable in terms of cytoskeletal phenotypes. In normal, abnormal, and pathologic conditions, the pheno-type V may change into phenotype VA,VAD, VD, and, eventually, into VA M, but terminal smooth muscle differentiation is never attained. Thus, the myofibroblast remains an enig-matic cell, one that appears and disappears after comple-tion of its functions or, exceptionally, one that may persist in certain pathologic conditions. Granulation Tissue Granulation tissue consists of a bed of fibroblastic cells separated by a collagenous matrix contain-ing capillary buds, fibrin, platelets, and inflammatory cells. According to the relative predominance of each constituent, four layers are classically distinguished: alterative; exudative; exudativo-productive; and cicatrizing (Fig-ure 6.5A). Granulation tissue fibroblasts characteristically disclose ultrastructural features of myofibroblasts. They are most numerous and best developed within the exudativo-productive layer and become progressively replaced towardthe deepest cicatrizing layer by fibroblasts. The orientation of the myofibroblasts varies in the different layers of granula-tion tissue. In the exudative layer, the long axis is perpendic-ular to the surface, whereas from the exudative-productive cicatrizing layer, the long axis is parallel to the surface. These data suggest that the spatial orienta-tion of myofibroblasts in granulating wounds varies, possibly posed of phenotype V myofibroblasts. These cells disclose subplasma-lemma I bundles of microfilaments with few dense bodies and also intracytoplasmic bundles of microfilaments with dense bod-ies corresponding to stress fibers in formation (uranyl acetate and lead citrate, x12,500). staining for a-smooth muscle actin and desmin. Myofibroblastic cells reveal intense staining for a-smooth muscle actin but are negative for desmin. Vascular smooth muscle cells are positive both for a-smooth muscle actin and desmin and the co-expression of proteins is indicated by yellow resulting from color addition. B.Immunoelectron microscopic localization of a-smooth muscle actin within intracy-toplasmic bundles of microfilaments, that is, stress fibers. C.Immunoelectron microscopic localization of a-smooth muscle actin in subplasmalemmal bundles of microfilaments. tomaxirruze the transmission of contractile forces and thereby effect wound closure. When the collagenous matrix is analyzed, type III collagen predominates. When granula-tion tissue is resorbed following wound closure, myofibro-blasts disappear and the more rigid type I collagen is identified. Analysis of cytoskeletal proteins by immunohistochemi-cal methods reveals that myofibroblasts from normal heal-ing wounds never express desmin or smooth muscle myosin heavy chains during the process of wound closure in the experimental animal. Smooth muscle differentiation in early granulation tissue is absent and myofibroblasts are often poorly developed and correspond to V cells (proto-myofibroblasts). Smooth muscle differ-entiation of myofibroblasts, however, becomes temporarily apparent because myofibroblasts express a-smooth muscle actin in increasing amounts from the eighth to the fifteenth day; this protein is located within bundles of microfilaments, as illus-trated by immunoelectron microscopic techniques C, D). This actin isoform disappears progressively from myofibroblasts and is not detectable after the thirtieth day by immunohistochemical and immunoelectron microscopic methods. These results clearly indicate that granulation tis-sue myofibroblasts temporarily acquire a VA phenotype. This is valid when wound repair is accomplished by primary intention. When repair is accomplished by secondary inten-tion in chronic granulation tissue (eg, chronic gastric ulcer, cutaneous ulceration, or pleural empyema), myofibroblasts of the VAD phenotype may be detectable.The study of the ontogenesis of wound healing reveals that many species possess the unique ability to heal wounds without scarring. Estes et al examining wounds in the fetal lamb, showed that there are differences between early and late gestational wound healing. In the lamb, term gestation is approximately 145 days. Early ges-tational wounds healed without scarring by repair of the epidermis, reconstitution of epidermal appendages, and remodeling of the dermal collagenous network. In con-trast, late gestational wounds healed with scarring through formation of granulation tissue con-taining myofibroblasts derived mostly from local resident fibroblasts. The situation appears to be different in heal-ing corneal wounds, in which corneal keratocytes transform into repair corneal fibroblasts or myofibroblasts. Pathologic Tissues Upon analysis of the many pathologic conditions in which myofibroblasts have been described, three fundamental pro-cesses emerge: responses to injury and repair phenomena or situations related to inflammation and tissue remodeling; quasi-neoplastic proliferative conditions; and the stro-mal response to neoplasia. This concept, enunciated some 30 years ago, appears valid to this day. Responses to Injury and Repair Phenomena Responses to injury and repair phenomena comprise human and experimental granulation tissue cirrhosis, tenosynovitis, radiation-induced pseudosarcoma of skin, burn contracture, ischemic contractures of ies to a-smooth muscle actin, vimentin, and desmin. One hyper-trophic scar contains V and VA cells, and the other, from a site of smallpox vaccination (C and D), contains mainly VAD cells. Colocalization of proteins is indicated by color addition; for example, green and red result in yellow. Note that most small blood vessels are positive for vimentin and a-smooth muscle actin. (Source: Sappino AP, SchOrch W, Gabbiani G. Differentiation repertoire of fibroblastic cells: Expres-sion of cytoskeletal proteins as marker of phenotypic modulations. Lab Invest 1990;63:144-161.) intrinsic muscles of the hand, renal interstitial fibrosis during obstructive nephropathy, pulmonary sarcoidosis, giant cell granuloma of jaws, schistosomalliver fibrosis, regenerating tendon, fibrous capsule around silicon mammary implants, nodular hyperplasia of the liver, ganglia of soft tissue, hypertrophic scars, cataract, bleomycin-induced pulmonary interstitial fibrosis in the rat, fibrous heart plaque in the carcinoid syndrome, arterial lesions in humans and experimental animals including the atheromatous plaque and restenosis, localized and systemic scleroderma, and experimental hydronephrosis. When cytoskeletal pro-teins of these conditions are analyzed most reactive cells cor-respond to myofibroblasts of the VA,some to the VAD,and few to the VD and VA M phenotype. In two conditions of abnormally healing wounds, hypertro-phic scars and keloids, one observes several important differ-ences. Hypertrophic scars always exhibit nodular structures in which fibroblastic cells, small vessels, and fine randomly organized collagen fibers are present. Within these nodules, numerous myofibroblasts of the VAphenotype and, in lesser numbers, myofibroblasts of the VAD phenotype are identi-fied. Exceptionally, myofibroblasts of the VA M phenotype are observed. Keloids contain large thick bands of closely packed cell fibers and rare nodular structures, the latter containing few or no VAcells. VAD cells are not observed within classical keloids, however, VA and VAD cells are frequently observed in rela-tively small keloids of Caucasians. A recent report proposed that a reactive myofibroblastic proliferation with increased deposition/formation of extracel-lular matrix might be responsible for the progressive and irre-versible obstruction of airways in chronic bronchial asthma. In asthma, it appears that epithelial-mesenchymal interactions may play an important role in its pathogenesis.Epithelial injury and subepithelial collagen deposition are char-acteristic of asthma. It was proposed that epithelial cell pro-liferation increases after airway injury in asthmatics, that epi-thelial cells stimulate lung myofibroblast collagen production, and that both processes are modulated by allergen-recruited inflammatory cells, proinflammatory cytokines, growth fac-tors, and mediator-generating enzymes. Beneath the damaged bronchial epithelium, there is an increase in the number of subepithelial myofibroblasts that deposit interstitial collagens, causing thickening and increased density of the subepithelial basement membrane. Myofibroblasts in Kidney Diseases Myofibroblasts play an important role in glomerular and interstitial nephropathies. Many progenitor cells in the kidney and also from other sites are candidates for trans-formation into myofibroblasts. In glomerular diseases the mesangial cell is probably the most important cell, which undergoes myofibroblastic transformation, and is therefore responsible for glomerular sclerosis. In interstitial renal diseases many cells might be progenitors for transformation into myofibroblasts. Most frequently it is probably the inter-stitial fibroblast, but tubular epithelial-mesenchymal tran-sition, and endothelial-myofibroblast transition might also contribute to the development of intersti-tial fibrosis. Other progenitor cells prone to be transformed into myofibroblasts include pericytes and probably also vascular smooth muscle cells through the mechanism of dedifferentiation. Finally bone marrow derived cells also may contribute to the development of interstitial fibrosis undergoing transformation into myofibroblasts and produc-ing extracellular matrix proteins. Focal segmental glomerular hyalinosis/sclerosis is another state, which might belong to the group of responses to injury and repair phenomena. PAS and «-smooth muscle actin. A and B. Normal glomerulus; B is without significant immunostaining of mesangial cells for (X-smooth muscle actin. C and D. Early stage of focal segmental hyalinosis character-ized by vacuolar degeneration of podocytes with hyalin PAS-positive droplets and increased mesangial matrix in two glomerular segments; that is, podocytosis. Mesangial cells of the two glomerular seg-ments disclose significant immunostaining for «-srnooth muscle actin. E and F.Typical segmental lesion with hyaline endomembranous PAS-positive deposit and foam cells. Mesangial cells disclose significant immunostaining for o-smooth muscle actin. cle actin. I. Mesangial cell disclosing stress fibers composed of microfilaments with dense bodies, enhanced in inset. The condition is associated with significant proteinuria and hypertension; many patients develop chronic renal failure, requiring dialysis and eventual renal transplantation. In FSGS, mesangial cells, which normally express only cyto-plasmic actins and, therefore, correspond to myofibroblasts with a V phenotype, may gradually acquire a VAphenotype, expressing a-smooth muscle actin as revealed by immuno-histochemical techniques. Moreover, they develop stress fibers as observed by ultrastructural exami-nation. These findings are similar to those in experimental immune complex nephritis in which mesangial expression of smooth muscle actin correlates with mesangial cell proliferation. In FSGS, mesangial cells expressing a-smooth muscle actin become progressively apparent in the early stage of the disease; C, D). Their numbers increase as the lesion progresses to the hyalinosis stage. At the stage of sclerosis,the number of mesangial cells immunostained for a-smooth muscle actin is reduced, somewhat analogous to that which occurs over time in wound healing. In diabetic nodular glomerular sclerosis a similar phe-nomenon is observed. The early stage of nodular sclerosis discloses irregular centrolobular small nodules associated with an increase in the number of mesangial cells and podocytes. Many mesangial cells express a-smooth muscle actin. In the late stage of nodular glo-merular sclerosis, centrolobular nodules are larger and occlude the peripheral lumina of glomerular capillary loops. A significant decrease of a-smooth muscle actin expressing myofibroblasts is observed, again analogous to wound healing. It has been shown that TG F-~1-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and therefore is as a key contributor to fibrosis and scar formation in interstitial diabetic nephropathy. PAS stained section discloses centrolobular small nodules surrounded by increased numbers of mesan-gial cells and podocytes. B.Immunostaining with a-smooth muscle actin reveals numerous mesangial cells which express this actin isoform, corresponding therefore to myofibroblasts. C.In the late stage, PAS stained section shows large centrolobular nodules and a decrease of the number of mesangial cells and podocytes. D.Immunostaining with a-smooth muscle actin reveals a significant decrease of myofibro-blasts, analogous to wound healing. In interstitial nephritis one observes an inflammatory predominantly mononuclear interstitial infiltrate with variable numbers plasma cells and polymor-phonuclear leucocytes. The inflammatory cellular infil-trate is variably dense and with no correlation with the degree of renal tubular insufficiency. Immunostaining with a-smooth muscle actin reveals many putative myofibro-blasts amongst vascular smooth muscle cells in the early stage before interstitial fibrosis/sclerosis is developed. By ultrastructure, the interstitial cells disclose all of the fea-tures of myofibroblasts, that is well developed rough endo-plasmic reticulum, bundles of microfilaments intersperses with dense bodies and located beneath the cell membrane and running parallel to the long axis, plas-malemmal attachment plaques and intermediate junctions connected to neighbor myofibroblasts. When treatmentis started in the early stage and before fibrosis/sclerosis is present, renal insufficiency, which might be severe often disappears and tubular function may return to normal levels. The origins of the myofibroblast in interstitial nephritis include epi-thelial-mesenchymal transition, pericytes and perivascular fibroblasts endothelial-myofibroblast transition and bone marrow derived stromal cells. Quasi-neoplastic Proliferative Conditions This group embodies the poorly understood but very impor-tant and frequent soft tissue proliferations included under the broad heading of fibromatoses, as well as many other soft tissue proliferations that share a predominant myofibroblastic composition and a variable proliferative potential yet do not metastasize. nostained with o-smooth muscle actin, and typical interstitial myofibroblast disclosing most of the essential ultrastructural traits of myofibroblasts. A.PAS stain reveals numerous mononuclear lymphoid inflammatory cells with a variable number plasma cells and polymorphonuclear leucocytes and with little fibrosis. B.Immu-nostaining with «-smooth muscle actin shows many positive interstitial cells. Vascular smooth muscle cells also express o-srnooth muscle actin. C.A typical myofibroblast with well-developed rough endoplasmic reticulum, a bundle of microfilaments with intersperse dense bodies running parallel to the long axis of the cell and located beneath plasma membrane and also an intermediate junction connecting another myofi-broblast. (Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Laboratory Investigation, advance online publication, August 1990.doi: 10.1038/sj.labinvest 1990;63:144-161.) Myofibroblasts constitute the principal cellular com-ponents of superficial and deep musculoaponeurotic fibro-matoses. Superficial fibromatoses include palmar fibromatosis (Dupuytren's disease, plantar fibro-matosis), Ledderhose's disease, penile fibromatosis), and knuckle pads. Deep musculoaponeurotic fibromatoses comprise extra-abdominal, abdominal, and intra-abdominal vari-ants, collectively named desmoid tumors. To this group belong the infantile fibromatoses. Other soft tissue proliferations predominantly composed of myofi-broblasts are nodular fasciitis, proliferative fasci-itis, proliferative myositis, giant fibroma oforal mucosa, dermatofibroma, elastofibroma, plasma cell granuloma of the lung, digital fibroma of infancy, and juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma. Myofibroblasts are also present in cardiac myxomas and in uterine plexiform tumors. Dupuytren's Disease Among quasi-neoplastic proliferations, Dupuytren's fibroma-tosis has been studied extensively by morphologic, immuno-histochemical, and biochemical techniques. Cytoskeletal proteins have been widely used as mark-ers of differentiation for neoplastic and quasi-neoplastic elongated cells with numerous cytoplasmic extensions and indented nuclei, some in cell division. Band C. Involutional phase nodule composed of aligned spindle cells that display fewer, shorter, and smaller cytoplasmic extensions than in A. D. Residual phase nodule showing slender spindle cells in a poorly vascularized and densely collagenous matrix. (Source: Schurch W, Skalli 0, Gabbiani G. Cellular biology of Dupuytren's disease. In: McFarlane RM, McGrouther DA, Flint MH, eds. Dupuytren's Disease: Biology and Treatment. London: Churchill Livingstone; 1990:31-47.) proliferations and as markers of adaptation to physiologic situations, particularly for muscular and related soft tissue proliferations. According to Luck, the nodules of Dupuytren's disease are assigned to three differ-ent phases, depending on the histologic pattern: prolif-erative phase; involutional phase; and residual phase. Patients with Dupuytren's disease often present multiple nodules showing considerable variation in their histologic appearance. The classification is, therefore, based on the predominant histologic pattern. Sections from proliferative phase nodules feature high cellular density, decreasing from the center to the periph-ery. They are well-vascularized and display a poorly collagenized appearance. Ultrastructurally, they are composed of myofibroblasts with numerous and long cyto-plasmic extensions, joined by numerous gap and adherens junctions. Their plasma membrane displays focal deposition of basal lamina, plasmalemmal attachment plaques, and pinocytotic vesicles, as well as cell-to-stroma attachment sites in the form of fibronexus. The cytoplasm features a well-developed rough endo-plasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus and numerous stress fibers, the latter usually oriented parallel to the long axis of the cell. The nucleus is typically indented and often contains one or several nuclear bodies. The extra-cellular matrix is composed of a few mature collagen fibers admixed with indistinct granular and basal lamina-like material. Involutional phase nodules also feature high cellular-ity, but the cells are smaller than those of the proliferative proliferative phase nodule. Note large typical myofibroblast with cytoplasmic extensions, well-developed rough endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi areas, and prominent cytoplasmic bundle of microfilaments with numerous dense bodies oriented parallel to the long axis of the cell. The nucleus is indented. The extracel-lular matrix contains few mature collagen fibers. Inset: Gap junction between two myofibroblasts followed by an intermediate junction. B. Double immunofluorescence staining for a-smooth muscle actin and desmin. The major-ity of the proliferating cells comprising the nodule correspond to VA cells, while lesser numbers of cells express VAD and V phenotypes. Co-expression of proteins is indicated by color addition; for example, green and red result in yellow. phase and tend to be aligned in the same direction B-C). Ultrastructurally, these nodules are composed of myofibroblasts that are also connected by gap and adherens junctions. These intercellular junctions, however, seem to be less numerous than in proliferative phase nodules. The most striking difference with proliferative phase nodules is the increased amount of collagen that envelopes myofibro-blasts. By immunoelectron microscopy, a-smooth muscle actin is localized within bundles of microfilaments of myofi-broblasts of the proliferative and involutional phase nodules. Residual phase nodules are hypocellular and the slen-der and aligned cells are surrounded by thick bands of colla-gen, giving them a tendon-like appearance. By ultrastructure, these nodules are composed of mature fibroblasts, some containing discrete sub-plasmalemmal bundles of microfilaments without dense bodies. Occasional poorly developed adherens-type junc-tions connect the fibroblasts, but gap junctions are no longer observed. The slender fibroblasts show smooth, contoured nuclei and are embedded in a dense collagenous matrix formed by thick bands of tightly packed collagen fibers. In conclusion, significant ultrastruc-tural differences exist between proliferative, involutional, and residual phase nodules in Dupuytren's disease in rela-tion to the cells, intercellular junctions, and composition of the extracellular matrix.When the collagenous matrix of Dupuytren's disease is analyzed by immunohistochemical techniques, proliferative phase nodules reveal a predominance of type III collagen, whereas in the residual fibroblastic phase, type I collagen predominates. Differences between proliferative and residual phase nodules are also defined in the vasculariza-tion. In proliferative phase nodules, capillaries are numer-ous and feature, ultrastructurally, large and prominent peri-cytes that display distinct smooth muscle differentiation; whereas in residual phase nodules, capillaries are sparse and are surrounded by small and inconspicuous pericytes that are devoid of a well-developed microfilamentous appa-ratus. Analogous to wound healing, the cicatrizing pro-cess within proliferative and involutional phase nodules is centripetal, being completed within residual phase nodules. When immunohistochemical techniques are employed to study the cellular phases of Dupuytren's disease the fol-lowing results are obtained. Cells of the proliferative phase nodules always express vimentin, which is associated in approximately 80% of the cells with a-smooth muscle actin and in about 20 to 40% with desmin when double-labeling immunofluorescence techniques are performed. Rarely, isolated cells positive for vimentin, a-smooth muscle actin, and smooth muscle myosin heavy chains with or without desmin are present [VA M phe-notype]. In involutional phase nodules, des min-positive ing slender fibroblasts with smooth contoured nuclei embedded in a dense collagenous matrix and joined by poorly differentiated junction. B. Double immunofluorescence staining for a-smooth muscle actin and desmin; co-expression of proteins is indicated by color addition; for example, green and red result in yellow. Cells comprising the residual phase nodule correspond to V cells. A few isolated cells express only VAD or VA phenotypes. VA and VAD cells are restricted to the large blood vessel. cells are less numerous or even absent, whereas a-smooth muscle actin-positive cells are still present, albeit in lesser numbers. In residual phase nodules few or no a-smooth muscle actin-positive cells persist, and the remaining slen-der cells express solely vimentin. Accord-ingly, cells comprising the nodules of Dupuytren's disease express different cytoskeletal phenotypes: Phenotype V, phenotype VAD, phenotype VA, and phenotype YD. In most proliferative phase nodules of Dupuytren's disease and also in the cellular areas of musculoaponeurotic fibromatoses, the number of VA cells considerably exceeds the number ofVAD and VD cells. At the heavily collagenized inter-phase of involutional and residual nodules, the number of VAD and VD cells decreases progressively and is replaced by an almost pure population of V cells. Despite their heterogeneity in intermediate filament pro-teins and actin isoforms, myofibroblasts from Dupuytren's disease express usually only non-muscle myo-sins. Exceptionally, isolated cells expressing smooth muscle myosin heavy chains [VA M phenotypes] are observed. In these tissues, the extracellular matrix around myo-fibroblasts is strongly stained with antibodies to fibronectin but not to laminin. Other Quasi-neoplastic Proliferative Conditions A heterogeneous cytoskeletal composition is also observed in myofibroblasts of dermatofibromas, which reveal at least three cytoskeletal phenotypes: VA, VAD, and V cells, with a predominance of VA cells in cellular dermatofibromas andan almost exclusive composition of V cells in fibrous der-matofibromas. Whether myofibroblasts of the VA M phenotype exist has not yet been determined. By ultra-structure, cellular dermatofibromas are composed of well-developed myofibroblasts, joined by gap and intermediate junctions, and admixed with variable numbers of fibroblasts and macrophages. Fibrous dermatofibromas, in contrast, are composed almost exclusively of fibroblasts and feature only small numbers of poorly developed myofibroblasts. This heterogeneous cellular and cytoskeletal phenotypic composition of dermatofibromas permits one to distinguish them from dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, which repre-sents a pure fibroblastic neoplasm-both at the ultras true-turallevel and with regard to the cytoskeletal immunophe-notype. Furthermore, the heterogeneous cytoskeletal composition of dermatofibroma identifies this lesion as a quasi-neoplastic reactive and proliferative condition, whereas dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans represents a fibroblastic neoplasm. Nodular and proliferative fasciitis are predominantly composed of myofibroblasts with similar cytoskeletal phe-notypes of VAand rare VAD cells, the latter more prominent in the proliferative variant. Infantile myofibromatosis reveals a predominance of VA cells with limited numbers of VAD cells. By ultrastructure, in contrast to other fibromatoses, smooth muscle differen-tiation appears to be more prominent than in conventional fibromatoses, although typical myofibroblasts are numerous, a feature that justifies the term infantile myofibromatosis. liferation, derived from the subcutaneous fascia. B.The majority of the spindle cells and vascular smooth muscle cells express a-smooth muscle actin. C.By ultrastructure, most of the stromal cells within the nodule correspond to typical myofibroblasts. (Uranyl acetate and lead citrate, x6900.) Furthermore, massive apoptosis has been documented in infantile myofibromatosis and is proposed as a putative mechanism of regression of this proliferative myofibroblas-tic lesion. Stromal Response to Neoplasia Legions of medical students have been taught that many invasive and metastatic carcinomas are characterized by hard consistency and retraction and are often fixed to adja-cent tissues. Typical examples are invasive ductal mammary carcinomas, associated with skin and or nipple retraction and skin retraction (dimple formation of the skin) at a distance from the invasive carcinomas B), annular stenosing colon carcinomas, gastric linitis plastica, the "frozen pelvis" in advanced gyne-cologic carcinomas, the "woody hard" nodule of invasive prostatic carcinoma, and metastatic carcinoma in matted lymph nodes fixed to surrounding tissues and the overlying skin. The hard consistency and the retraction phenomena are due to the desmoplastic stromal reaction and contract-ing myofibroblasts. Myofibroblasts are particularly numerous within the stroma of desmoplastic and retracted primary invasive and metastatic carcinomas, and the retraction associ-ated with such carcinomas is attributed to the contractile forces generated by stromal myofibroblasts. Myofibroblasts have not been usually observed in the stroma contiguous to in situ carcinomas, suggesting that invasion beyond the basal lamina is required to evoke a myofibroblastic stromal reaction. On occasion, stromal cells expressing a-smooth muscle actin are observed around in situ ductal breast carcinoma. By ultrastructure, the periductal stromal cells expressing a-smooth muscle actin may disclose the typical morphologic features of myofibroblasts with well-developed stress fibers and fibronexus. This early myofibro-blastic stromal reaction around ducts of in situ carcinomas is not uniform in a given case and may change from one duct to another. However, myofibroblasts have been described in squamous intraepithelial lesions of the uterine cervix, close to the basal lamina, in increasing num-bers and intensity of staining from low-grade to high-grade variants, using immunohistochemical techniques. Stromal cells with myofibroblastic features are notably absent or equivocally present within carcinomas lacking sig-nificant retraction and desmoplasia. Myofibroblasts are not uniformly distributed within des-moplastic carcinomas. When their spatial relation to other components of breast carcinomas is analyzed, they are most numerous within the young mesenchymal stroma, areas cor-responding to early stromal invasion, or, more consistently, in the peripheral invasive cellular front of mammary carcino-mas. In the central sclerotic area of such neoplasms, myofibroblasts are poorly developed or absent; this possibly is a reflection of apoptosis B). Similarly, myofibroblasts are numerous in the cellular, edematous, and poorly collagenized stroma of other invasive and metastatic carcinomas. Three types of myofibroblastic stromal reactions are observed within infiltrating ductal mammary carcinomas: precocious, myofibroblasts precede the carcinoma cells by some distance into adjacent tissue; synchronous, myofibroblasts appear spatially among the carcinoma cells; and late, Superficial 'a,yer-----of superficial. fascia .II~~----- Oeep ,layer o,fsuperficia' fascia Pectoral fascia D~mple of the skin B cinoma. A.Note irregular stellate shape ofthe carcinoma and retraction ofthe cut surface and the nipple. B.Schema explaining dimple formation of the skin at a distance from the scirrhous breast carcinoma. The contractile forces at the peripheral cellular front rich in myofibroblasts are conveyed to the surrounding connective tissue septa which envelop the mammary lobules and to the fascial septa of the breast, the Cooper ligaments, which are intimately connected with the superficial and deep layer of the superficial fascia. Enveloping the mammary gland, this fascia is attached superficially to the skin and deeply to the pectoral fascia. Contractile forces in or related to the carcinoma exert traction upon the fascia septa resulting in a dimpling or retraction of the skin at some distance of the carcinoma without invasion of the skin. C.The colon carcinoma features annular stenosis. The carcinoma invaded the pericolic fibroadipose tissue. myofibroblasts are identified central to the peripheral inva-sive cellular front of the carcinoma cells. These three types of myofibroblastic stromal reactions are observed in different areas of the invading front of most infiltrating ductal carcinomas of the breast, the synchronous stromal reaction being usually predominant. When the collag-enous matrix is analyzed, increased amounts of type III col-lagen are present within the young mesenchyme, areas with numerous myofibroblasts. In contrast, type I collagen is most prominent within the central sclerotic zone of breast carcinomas, areas in which myofibroblasts are replaced by fibroblasts. continuous layer of myoepithelial cells as revealed by immunostaining for a-smooth muscle actin. Periduc-tal stromal cells lack immunostaining for a-smooth muscle actin. C.Step-sections of comedocarcinoma: Numerous periductal stromal cells disclose significant staining for a-smooth muscle actin. D.In situ crib-riform carcinoma with numerous periductal stromal cells stained for a-smooth muscle actin. (A and C-Ieft part: hematoxylin-phloxine-saffron.) thelial cells and a continuous basal lamina separate the carcinoma cellsfrom the surrounding stroma. The stromal fibroblastdiscloses smooth cellular and nuclear contours; the cyto-plasm is scant and devoid of bundles of microfilaments. B.Ultramicroinvasive ductal carcinoma. A carci-noma cellprotrudes with a cytoplasmic extension into the periductal stroma through a gap within the basal lamina. The periductal fibroblast reveals abundant cytoplasm and discloses aggregates of microfilaments with attenuated dense bodies. (Uranyl acetate and lead citrate, A, xll,250; 8,x13,500). (Source: SchOrch W, Lagace R, Seemayer TA. Myofibroblastic stromal reactions in retracted scirrhous carcinomas of the breast. Surg Gynec Onco/1982;154:351-358.) periductal myofibroblasts with well-developed stress fibers (uranyl acetate and lead citrate; A, x7875; 8, x12,500). In the daily practice of the surgical pathologist, immu-nostaining of the stromal cells with appropriate markers may be helpful to distinguish in situ and well-differentiated tubular and especially invasive cribriform ductal breast car-cinomas. The presence of a pronounced cellular stromal reaction around cribriform clusters is per se suspicious for invasion. As reveals, there is a complete absence of myoepithelial cells, since myofibro-blasts never express keratins. This is valuable for all condi-tions in which myofibroblasts are observed, a fact which is not sufficiently recognized in the current literature. Smoothmuscle myosin heavy chain is not only expressed by myo-epithelial cells, but also by a considerable number of stro-mal myofibroblasts in invasive ductal breast carcinomas and immunostaining for smooth muscle myosin heavy chain is, therefore, of no value to distinguish myoepithelial cells and myofibroblast cell. Keratin immunostaining differen-tiates a myoepithelial cell from a myofibroblast . Many pulmonary carcinomas, especially peripheral adenocarcinomas, are associated with some degree of scar-ring and are often associated with pleural retraction. If this cells separated by small connective tissue septa. B. Stromal cells reveal no significant staining for a-smooth muscle actin. C.Transmission electron micrograph illustrating neoplastic cellswith scattered electron-dense neurosecretory-type granules in close proximity to a fibroblastwith a smooth, contoured nucleus devoid of microfilaments. sclerosis. All sections are immunostained with a-smooth muscle actin. A. In precocious stromal reaction myofibroblasts precede carcinoma cell clusters by some distance into the adjacent fatty tissue. B. In syn-chronous stromal reaction myofibroblasts are distributed amongst the carcinoma cell clusters. C.Inthe late stromal reaction myofibroblasts appear central to the peripheral invasive cellular front of carcinoma cell clusters. D.Inthe central sclerotic area carcinoma cell clusters are surrounded by thick bands of col-lagen. At the border of the invasive cellular front of ductal carcinomas, a decrease of the immunostaining for a-smooth muscle actin toward the central area is observed. cellular front revealing numerous typical stromal myofibroblasts with notched nuclei and bundles of cytoplasmic microfilaments with dense bodies around neoplastic cellsadjacent to an acinus, which is in the lower right corner. Inset: Stromal myofibroblasts are joined by gap and intermediate junctions. B.Central sclerotic area illustrating stromal cellswith smooth contoured nuclei devoid of abundant cytoplasmic microfilaments and separated by thick bands of mature collagen around clusters of carcinoma cells. ductal breast carcinoma disclosing cellular stromal reaction. 8-E step sec-tions. B. Complete absence of cells immunostained for keratin 14. C. Numer-ous stromal cells including those in close contact with the cribriform clusters are expressing o-smooth muscle actin and represent stromal myofibroblasts. These cells close to the cribriform clusters well could represent attenuated o-smooth muscle actin positive myoepithelial cells as observed in in situ carcinoma. D. Stromal cells lack immunostaining for p63 (marker of myoepithelial cells). E. Immunostaining of cribriform clusters with keratin 19 (marker for luminal ductal cells. This figure illustrates the importance of immunostaining of questionable invasive cribriform ductal carcinomas and to separate them from in situ cribriform ductal car-cinomas, since myofibroblasts never express keratins. process is pronounced, the term scar carcinoma is applied to these neoplasms. In 1962, Carroll reported that the presence of elastic fibers and anthracotic pigment in scars suggested that they had been present prior to the develop-ment of the neoplasm. The more recent literature suggests that scarring represents a desmoplastic stromal reaction in response to neoplastic invasion rather than a preexistent condition. In favor of this latter interpretation is the pres-ence of increased amounts of type III collagen within pul-monary carcinomas with marked scarring, as is seen in early invasive zones of mammary carcinoma. In addi-tion' the majority of stromal cells in scar carcinomas of the lung reveal ultrastructural features of myofibroblasts, suggesting that pulmonary adenocarcinomas with scarring are neoplasms with a desmoplastic stromal reaction, analo-gous to many invasive and metastatic carcinomas elsewhere. Analysis of cytoskeletal proteins, including intermedi-ate filaments, actin isoforms, and smooth muscle myosin VA, VAD, and VA M myofibroblasts. A.Double immunofluorescence staining for a-smooth muscle actin and desmin. Stromal cells expressing a-smooth muscle actin are more numer-ous than those expressing a-smooth muscle actin and desmin. B.Double immunofluorescence staining for a-smooth muscle actin and smooth muscle myosin heavy chain; co-expression of proteins is indicated by color addition; for example, green and red result in yellow. Stromal cells expressing a-smooth muscle actin are slightly more numerous than those expressing smooth muscle myosin heavy chains M cells). C.Double immunofluorescence staining for desmin and myosin heavy chain; co-expression of proteins is indicated by color addition; for example, green and red result in yellow. Stromal cells expressing smooth muscle myosin heavy chain are far more numerous than those that express desmin M cells). In conclusion, the peripheral invasive front of ductal breast carcinomas contains predominantly VA cells, followed by VA M cells. heavy chains reveals phenotypic heterogeneity of stromal cells in invasive and metastatic carcinomas. Areas with numerous myofibroblasts, corresponding to early stromal invasion of breast carcinomas, contain a predominance of VAcells admixed with variable numbers ofVAD, VA M, and V cells, suggesting that certain stromal cells undergo a form of cytodifferentiation not too dissimilar from smooth muscle metaplasia M cells). In con-trast, sclerotic areas disclose numerous V cells with occa-sional VA cells. No VAD and VA M cells are observed. A recent development of myofibroblast research con-cerning the stromal response to epithelial neoplasia is the hypothesis, emerging from in vitro and in vivo research, that during carcinoma evolution epithelial cells and myo-fibroblasts cross-talk via cytokines and growth factors and that myofibroblasts exert a permissive action in the acquisi-tion of invasive and metastatic activities of epithelial cells. Obviously this possibility, if confirmed, would open new avenues in the search of strategies aiming at con-trolling cancer progression. Myofibroblasts have also been described in sarcomas where they generally constitute a small fraction of the cellpopulation. They were identified in all cases of malig-nant fibrous histiocytomas and well-differentiated sclerosing liposarcomas. Though most numerous in areas of des-moplasia, in no instance did myofibroblasts constitute the dominant cellular constituent of either neoplasm . Myofibroblasts have been identified with lesser frequency and in smaller numbers in fibrosarcoma, synovial sarcoma, malignant hemangiopericytoma, and neuroblas-toma. No myofibroblasts were observed in a wide assortment of diverse sarcomas in which desmoplasia was not a feature. Myofibroblasts have been identified in nodular scleros-ing Hodgkin's disease at the nodule-stromal interphase, which is usually heavily collagenized. These areas contain numerous VA and V cells with very occasional VAD cells. Whether this contributes to the rela-tively favorable prognosis of this variant of Hodgkin's dis-ease is an open question. Neoplasms of Myofibroblasts: Benign and Malignant Finally, several reports describe myofibroblastic neoplasms. In our opinion, neoplastic transformation of the myofibro-blast, in the extreme is possible but certainly remains an uncommon event. The plethora of articles related to this matter, particularly in the mid- and late-1990s, stems from the criteria employed to define this cell. The myofibroblast is presently defined solely at the ultrastructural level; its definition at the light microscopic and immunohistochemi-cal levels is less precise and, on occasion, imprecise. A significant number of reports describe myofibroblastic neo-plasms; some were considered as sarcomas, and many more were described as benign myofibroblasto-mas or tumors of similar character with an assortment of designations. The benign myofibroblastic proliferations are gener-ally well-circumscribed lesions, contrary to the poorly cir-cumscribed and often infiltrating quality of reactive and quasi-neoplastic proliferative conditions; for example, fibro-matoses, nodular and proliferative fasciitis, and prolifera-tive myositis, lesions replete with myofibroblasts. Although thought to be composed of myofibroblasts, most of the benign myofibroblastomas were not evaluated ultrastructur-ally; in the few cases for which this technique was employed, typical myofibroblasts were not found. For similar reasons one might cast a jaundiced eye on the presence of myo-fibroblasts in mammary myofibroblastomas, the palisaded myofibroblastoma, the intranodal hemorrhagic spindle-cell tumors with amianthoid fibers of lymph nodes, soft tissue myofibroblastomas, angiomyo-fibroblastomas of the vulva, angiomyofibroblas-toma-like tumors of the male genital tract, meningeal Malignant fibrous histiocytoma (storiform-pleomorphic type). A.Histologic aspect illustrating spindle cell tumor with storiform pattern and isolated pleomorphic cells. B.Few spindle cells disclose immunostaining for a-smooth muscle actin. C.Transmission electron micro-graph illustrating a typical myofibroblast with cytoplasmic bundle of microfilaments; the cell is partly enveloped by a basal lamina. myofibroblastomas, and pulmonary myofibroblastic tumors. Immunohistochemically, the proliferating cells composing the so-called myofibroblastomas and related neoplasms disclose heterogeneous cytoskeletal phenotypes, such as a positive reaction for a-smooth muscle actin and absence of reactivity for desmin in the palisaded myofibro-blastoma and intranodal hemorrhagic spindle-cell tumors of lymph nodes and staining for desmin asso-ciated with negative staining for a-smooth muscle actin in angiomyofibroblastoma of the vulva. The so-called myofibroblastomas and other related neoplasms most likely represent myogenic stromal tumors, a designation proposed by Begin, possibly derived from myogenic stromal cells that have variable degrees of smooth muscle differ-entiation because myofibroblasts, using strict ultrastructural criteria, either were not identified or were rare. Sarcomas composed entirely or partially of cells that disclose some degree of morphologic or immunohistochem-ical features of myofibroblasts but lack the typical ultra-structural traits of myofibroblasts could well belong to the group of myogenic sarcomas. One has to remember that for a cell to be classified as a myofibroblast it need not express a-smooth muscle actin. In fact, whether or not a cell expresses a-smooth muscle actin has no bearing on whether or not it is a myofibroblast. In our opinion, while myofibroblastic sarcomas may exist, they are rare and their identification requires electron microscopy. Finally, to conclude this controversial issue, it might be well to cite Juan Rosai: "Cells with myofibroblastic features can be found in a large number of benign and malignant soft tissue lesions, which means that we are in danger of creating a waste-basket category, just as large if not larger than that of malignant fibrous histiocytoma. Therefore, if there is to be a category of myofibroblastic tumors, it would be wise to reserve it for lesions that are composed almost entirely of cells having the hybrid features of myofibroblasts and which do not fit the cri-teria of already established entities." Now, a few words concerning inflammatory myofibro-blastic tumor. In the 2002 World Health Organization clas-sification of soft tissue tumors, inflammatory myofibroblas- Nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's disease. A. Gross aspect of cut surface of lymph node demonstrating nodules surrounded by thick connective tissue septa. (Courtesy of Dr. Roger Gareau, Department of Pathology, Hotel-Dieu Hospital, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.) B. Histologic aspect illustrating nodules of atypical lymphoid nodules with some lacunar cells. The nod-ules are enveloped by dense collagenous containing numerous spindle cells. C. Several spindle cells around the nodule express a-smooth muscle actin. D. Few spindle cells express desmin. All internodular stromal cells express vimentin. E. Transmission electron micrograph from internodular stroma illustrating numerous typical myofibroblasts with bundles of cytoplasmic microfilaments and dense bodies. tic tumor is presented as a clinical/pathologic entity, albeit one that is genetically heterogeneous. Its synonyms are numerous: Plasma cell granuloma, plasma cell pseudotu-mor, inflammatory myofibrohistiocytic proliferation, omental mesenteric myxoid hamartoma, inflammatory pseudotumor, and inflammatory fibrosarcoma. The entity appears to have emerged in a manner reminiscent of malignant fibrous histiocytoma. That this tumor discloses predominant myofibroblastic differentiation is questionable. Classically, these tumors present in the lung, mesentery, and omentum of children or adolescents and may be accompanied by fever, weight loss, fatigue, anemia, thrombocytosis, polyclonal hyperglobulinemia, and an elevated erythrocyte sedimenta-tion rate. Histologic sections reveal a polymorphous mixture of cells, including spindle cells, plasma cells, lym-phocytes, eosinophils, and occasional ganglion-like cells. The spindle cells in 50% of the tumors express cytoplasmic anaplastic lymphoma kinase protein, and this correlates with rearrangements of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase ALK, ALK tyrosine kinase receptor gene at 2p23. This genetic aberration is most commonly seen in pediatric inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors but is not specific for the condition. In addition to anaplastic lymphoma kinase expression, p80 is consistently expressed in inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors. Most of the tumors are biologically benign; however, up to 25% of those nonpulmonary may recur and, in rare instances, the tumor may metastasize. Thus, in our opinion, most of the described myofibro-blastic sarcomas described are not unequivocally composed of myofibroblasts. That said, we have to admit that a few conditions composed Myofibroblastoma of a male breast. A.Gross appear-ance disclosing well-circumscribed bilobar tumor. B.Histologic aspect illustrating spindle cells with acidophilic cytoplasm and bland nuclei. C and D. Intense immunostaining for a-smooth muscle actin and desmin. E.Ultrastructural aspect disclosing discrete smooth muscle differentiation. Short bundle of microfilaments and segment of basal lamina. (Uranyl acetate and lead citrate, x17,750.) of spindle cells disclosing ultrastructural features of myo-fibroblasts have been described, but they are rare. As for inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors, whether or not this is a specific entity in which the myofibroblast is the principal cell remains an open question.