Embryology The external ear develops from the first branchial groove. The external auricle forms from the fusion of the auricular hillocks or tubercles, a group of mesenchymal tis-sue swellings from the first and second branchial arches, that lie around the external portion of the first branchial groove. The external auditory canal is considered a nor-mal remnant of the first branchial groove. The tympanic membrane forms from the first and second branchial pouches and the first branchial groove. The ectoderm of the first branchial groove gives rise to the epithelium on the external side, the endoderm from the first branchial pouch gives rise to the epithelium on the internal side and the mesoderm of the first and second branchial pouches gives rise to the connective tissue lying between the external and internal epithelia. ANATOMY The anatomy of the external ear is seen in . The outer portion of the external ear includes the auricle Crura of antihelix. --~~':----' Scaphoid fossa ~~~;I~.路--路~~\路~~-路Triangular fossa Tragusncha Antitragus" eton of the auricle consists of a single plate of elastic car-tilage conforming to the shape of the ear. The lobule is the only part of the auricle that is devoid of skeletal support. The cartilage of the auricle is continuous with that of the external auditory canal. The auricle is attached to the bony skull by three ligaments, including anterior, superior, and posterior. The anterior ligament attaches the helix and the tragus to the zygomatic process. The superior ligament attaches the spine of the helix to the superior margin of the bony external meatus. The posterior ligament attaches the medial surface of the concha to the mas-toid process. The auricle is anchored through its continuity with the cartilage of the meatus and through the skin and extrinsic muscles. The extrinsic muscles of the ear include the anterior, superior, and posterior auricular muscles. These muscles are usually functionless but may be sub-ject to voluntary control as in ear "wiggling." There are also small intrinsic muscles in connection with the cartilage of the external ear, but they are of no apparent importance. The extrinsic and intrinsic muscles of the ear are inner-vated by the facial nerve. The external auditory canal or meatus extends from the concha to its medial limit which is the external aspect of the tympanic membrane. The lateral portion of its wall consists of cartilage and connective tissue. The medial portion of its wall consists of bone. The cartilaginous part of the external auditory canal constitutes slightly less than half its total length. Inconstant fissures referred to as the fissures of Santorini occur in the cartilage; these fissures may trans-mit infection from the canal to the parotid gland and the superficial mastoid regions, or vice versa. The bony part of the canal is formed by both the tympanic part and the petrous part of the temporal bone. The anterior, inferior, and lower posterior parts of the bony wall are formed by the C-shaped part of the temporal bone developed from the annulus tympanicus of the fetus. However, the annulus is incomplete in the posterosuperior part of the wall, and this part of the wall in adults is formed by the squamous and petrous parts of the temporal bone. In adults, the ante-rior and inferior walls of the cartilaginous canal are closely related to the parotid gland. The anterior wall of the bony canal is closely related to the mandibular condyle, the pos-terior wall to the mastoid air cells, and the medial portion of the superior wall to the epitympanic recess . The tympanic membrane is situated obliquely at the end of the external auditory canal sloping medially both from above downward and from behind for-ward. The tympanic membrane is a fibrous sheet interposed between the external auditory canal and the middle ear cav-ity. The connective tissue interposed between these two layers consists of radiating fibers attached to the manubrium of the malleus that are reinforced peripherally by circular fibers. The latter are thickened at the margin of the tympanic membrane to form a fibrocartilaginous ring attaching the tympanic I Posteroinferior quadrant membrane to the tympanic sulcus of the temporal bone. In the upper portion of the tympanic membrane, there is a limited area where the connective tissue fibers are lacking; this area is referred to as the pars flaccida or Shrapnell's membrane. In this area, the tympanic portion of the tempo-ral bone is deficient; this gap is referred to as the tympanic incisure or the notch of Rivinus the tympanic membrane attaches to the temporal bone. The remainder of the tym-panic membrane in which there are intact connective tissue fibers is referred to as the pars tensa. The outer aspect of the tympanic membrane is concave. The center of the concavity is referred to as the umbo, which is the strong point of attachment of the manubrium of the malleus to the tympanic membrane. In the anterosuperior portion of the tympanic membrane, the lateral process of the malleus is attached; from this point of attachment, the anterior and posterior mall ear folds pass to the cartilaginous annulus and separate the pars flaccida from the pars tensa. In otoscopic examinations of the tympanic membrane, the bright area of light reflection present downward and for-ward from the umbo is referred to as the "cone of light." HISTOLOGY Histologically, the auricle is essentially a cutaneous struc-ture composed of keratinizing, stratified squamous epi-thelium with associated cutaneous adnexal structures that include hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and eccrine sweat glands. In addition to the hair fol-licles and sebaceous glands, the outer third of the exter-nal auditory canal is noteworthy due to the presence of modified apocrine glands called ceruminal glands that replace the eccrine glands seen in the auricular der-mis. Ceruminal glands produce cerumen and are arranged in clusters composed of cuboidal cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm often containing a granular, golden-yellow pigment. These cells have secretory drop-lets along their luminal border. Peripheral to the secre-tory cells are flattened myoepithelial cells. The ducts of The auricle is a cutaneous structure histologically com-posed of keratinizing stratified squamous epithelium with associated cutaneous adnexal structures that include hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and eccrine sweat glands. the ceruminal glands terminate in the hair follicle or on the skin. The ducts of the ceruminal glands lack apocrine or myoepithelial cells. In the inner portion of the exter-nal auditory canal, ceruminal glands, as well as the other adnexal structures are absent. The subcutaneous tissue is composed of fibroconnec-tive tissue, fat, and elastic-type fibrocartilage, which gives the auricle its structural support. The earlobe is devoid of cartilage and is replaced by a pad of adipose tissue. The perichondrium is composed of loose vascular connective tissue. Similar to the auricle, the external auditory canal is lined by keratinizing squamous epithelium that extends to include the entire canal and covers the external aspect of the tympanic membrane. The tympanic membrane has a central bilaminated zone including lateral radially arranged and medial circularly arranged collagenous fibers . The inner two-thirds of the external auditory canal contain bone rather than cartilage. Due to the absence of adnexal structures, there is relatively close apposition of the epithelium to the subjacent bone. AUDITORY EPITHELIAL MIGRATION Auditory epithelial migration represents the mechanism by which keratin is removed from the tympanic mem-brane. Without such a self-cleaning process, the keratin squames normally produced by the stratified squamous epithelium of the tympanic membrane would continu-ously build up and interfere with the conduction of sound via the tympanic membrane. The entire epithelium including keratin moves from the tympanic membrane onto the deep external auditory canal. From the deep external auditory canal, the epithelium moves laterally to canal is noteworthy due to the presence of mwdified apocrine glands called ceruminal glands that replace the eccrine glands seen in the auricular dermis. A.Ceruminal glands are submucosal in location and are arranged in clusters or lobules; B.ceruminal glands are composed of a two-cell layer, including the inner or secretory cells containing intracytoplasmic cerumen appearing as granular, golden-yellow pigmentation, and flattened-appearing myoepithelial cells located peripheral to the secretory cells. Focally, the secretory cells show holocrine type secretion. the junction of the deep canal and the cartilagi-nous canal where it is desquamated. Auditory epi-thelial migration occurs in two separate and discrete path-ways. In one pathway, the epithelium moves upward over the handle of the malleus then moves posterosuperiorly across the pars flaccida moving laterally over the deep canal. The other pathway is radially moving centrifugally away from the handle of the malleus and the pars flaccida to the periphery of the tympanic membrane and then to the deep canal .Ll ). Michaels and Soucek have extensively evaluated the process of auditory epithelial migration and cor-related the pathways to the development of the epithelia of the tympanic membrane and deep external canal in the embryo and fetus. The process of auditory epithelialmigration has been felt to represent a possible pathogen-esis for the development of cholesteatoma. However, there is no definitive evidence linking auditory epithelial migration to the development of cholesteatoma.