Chromosomal karyotypes of lipomas have been studied and reveal nonrandom changes involving chro-mosomes 3 and 12, indicative of clonality. The balanced translocation t is a common finding, with breakpoints described at probably identical locations-q27;q13 and q28;q14. The breakpoint on chromosome 12 is very close to the one described in the t translocation in MLSs. This balanced trans-location involving chromosome 12 is seen in roughly 50% of lipomas and may involve other chromosomes such as 21 and 7. Another one-third of lipomas show a ring chromosome originally described by Heim et al. as a possible rearrangement of chromosome 3; this may be a marker for lipogenic tumors. Rarely, chromosome 6 hasshown an abnormality. Interestingly, subgroups of lipomas may show different cytogenic changes. Likewise, clonal chromosomal changes are noted In lipoblastoma with the abnormality at 8q11-q13. SYNDROMES ASSOCIATED WITH FATTY LESIONS The word lipomatosis may appropriately refer to two sepa-rate conditions: The presence of multiple subcutaneous lipomas and the infiltration of organs or sites such as the pelvis by adipose tissue. The bilateral multiple symmetrical lipomatosis syndrome (Madelung's dis-easeJ is said to be frequently accompanied by a high intake of alcohol. However, there is increasing evidence that there is no association of MSL with alcohol abuse, that there may be a constitutional mitochon-drial dysfunction, that mitochondral DNA may be abnormal, that patients have plasma lipid anomalies, and that the cells involved may be distorted brown fat cells supportive of a neoplastic nature to MSL. Lipomatosis may involve a single portion of the body, such as the face, the spinal epidural area, the mesentery, the mediastinum and abdomen, the mediastinum alone, the brain, and the kidney, as well as subcutaneous tissue. Syn-dromes relating to many of these are delineated in Table 7.2. Lipomas, either as single or multiple tumors, may be part of various syndromes, some of which are autosomal dominant [Gardner's syndrome, MEA type 1, Bannayan's syndrome, or tuberous sclerosisJ. Pathologists may find it interesting to note that lipomatous lesions may also occur in Cowden's disease, Beckwith's hemihypertrophy, and as fat within a pulmonary "hamartoma" in Carney's syndrome. Furthermore, adipose tissue lesions may be found in asso-ciation with other clinical syndromes as well. The listing in Table 7.2 is meant to be as complete as pos-sible for informational purposes. The lipodystrophies (mem-branous and intestinal or mesenteric) were discussed earlier. MIMICS OF FAT CEllS Mature Fat Cells Pathologists visualize adipocytes as clear cells or "white holes" on routine sections. Therefore, other cells or pro-cesses with this white hole appearance may be confused with them. Some lesions are fairly obvious-like the vacu-olated lymphadenopathy of lymph angiogram effect. Dilated superficial lymphatics if closely clustered, as they may be in a nasal polyp, remind one of adipocytes at medium power. The submucosal cystic spaces of pneumatosis cys-toides intestinalis are composed of gas with a lining of inflammatory cells, histiocytes, and giant cells. Cysts very similar in histology are occasionally noted within ovarian teratomas; here, it is probably a reaction to internal rup-ture. Likewise, small gaseous cysts without any lining in the intestinal mucosa truly mimic lipocytes in an entity termed pseudo lipomatosis. Similar clear but artifactual vacu-oles in the skin have been called "pseudolipomatosis cutis". Termed villous edema in placental texts, this artifact of chorionic villi gives them a pseudolipomatous appear-ance. Lipid-filled sinusoidal Ito cells in the liver simulate small adipocytes in vitamin A toxicity. Lipoblasts The response to the lipidlike substance silicone after the rupture of a breast implant can cause concern: When the response to the silicone is marked with sheets of histiocytes containing a single dominant vacuole, the cells resemble lipoblasts and the lesion may be mistaken for liposarcoma. Tumors with vacuoles also cause the pathologist to con-sider a lipocytic origin. Metastases to the skin or subcutane-ous region of signet-ring carcinoma or signet-ring melanoma may resemble lipoblasts, and other helpful features such as nesting or spindling are not always present. Lymphomas of both B- and T-cell origin exhibiting a vacuolated or signet-ring appearance have recently been described, may mimic liposarcoma, and should be in the differential diagnosis of cutaneous, nodal, or retroperitoneal tumors. Mesenchymal tumors such as epithelioid smooth mus-cle lesions and fibrohistiocytic neoplasms can be vacuolated as well, due to an artifact and proteoglycan material, respectively. These two tumor groups, particularly in the form of gastrointestinal stromal malignancies (leio-myosarcomas) and myxoid malignant fibrous histiocytoma, probably account for the largest number of lesions mistaken for liposarcoma. In the gastrointestinal tumors, the perinu- Adipocyte mimic. Subcutaneous metastases from either signet-ring carcinoma or melanoma may rarely imitate a lipocytic tumor. clear vacuole coupled with a cellular epithelioid morphol-ogy can closely mimic the round cell or cellular MLS. In myxoid fibrohistiocytic tumors of various types, vacuolated cells superficially simulate the lipoblast, but closer inspec-tion reveals a delicate basophilic substance in the cyto-plasm, apparently due to matrix production by the tumor dermatofibrosarcoma and myxoid malignant fibrous histiocytoma, cells with a vacuolated appearance may be confused with lipoblasts; however, the vacuole contains a wispy bluish coloration due to the presence of proteoglycan matrix. in the spindle cell hemangioma, but they are endothelial in nature and often line vascular spaces as seen here. cells. Unusual paragangliomas with vacuoles may also be puzzling. Other lesions most often simulating lipocytes are those of endothelial origin because a true and often large vacuole is produced. Such cells may be identified in the histiocytoid hemangioma, in other epithelioid angiomas, in the spindle cell heman-gioendothelioma, in epithelioid heman-gioendothelioma, and in some poorly differentiated angiosarcomas. In contrast to most large lipoblasts, the large vacuoles in endothelial tumors show a central septation. Chordomas, particularly with a sacral presentation, may be confused with a lipocytic tumor due to the prominent vacuolization of the physaliphorous cells. The benign notochordal cell tumor has large clear vacuoles devoid of mucin and this may be mistaken for a peculiar change in vertebral body adipose tissue. Mesothelio-mas may also be vacuolated mimicking liposarcoma. sarcomas, vacuolated endothelial cells also resemble fat cells; however, note the presence of occasional septated vacuoles, a feature typical for proliferating endothelial cells and unlike adipocytes.The best defense against a misdiagnosis of another tumor as a lipocytic one is strict adherence to the defini-tion of a lipoblast: A cell, occasionally large but usually small, with a vacuole or vacuoles indenting the nucleus. The requirement for nuclear indentation assures an intra-cellular/cytoplasmic location for the vacuole and also excludes the semicircular nuclei around small vascular channels. Extracellular vacuoles are a common phenom-enon, particularly in lesions with areas of mucoid matrix, and are often mistaken for a true intracellular finding; however, the nucleus is never affected since the substance is noncytoplasmic. True liposarcomatous differentiation may be rarely identified in nonfatty malignancies such as medullo-blastoma, cystosarcoma phyllodes, and even mesothelioma.