The posterior and peripheral borders of the orbit are defined by bones of the skull, face, and nose. At the anterior orbital margin, the periosteum of the orbital bones gives rise to a dense connective tissue sheet , which extends forward to insert into the eyelids. Tissue posterior to this septum is considered to be within the orbit. In the human adult, the orbit measures approxi-mately 40 mm in height, 45 mm in depth, and has a volume of almost 30 mL. Several bony canals allow for transmission of blood vessels and nerves into and out of the orbit, poste-riorly. The contents of the orbit are organized in a complex three-dimensional arrangement. Aside from the eye, the optic nerve and its meningeal coverings, Tenon's capsule, the extraocular muscles, the lacrimal gland, blood vessels, and a delicate framework of fibroadipose connec-tive tissue constitute the major components of the orbit. The only epithelial structure normally present in the orbit is the lacrimal gland. Closely apposed to the globe and situated in the superolateral aspect of the orbit, this gland is traditionally divided into two parts: a larger orbital lobe and a smaller palpebral lobe. About a dozen ducts from the lacrimal gland open into the superior conjunctival fornices and transmit their secretions into the tear film. The lacrimal gland is not encapsulated, and thin fibroconnective tissue septae divide the tissue into lobules composed of acini and lined by columnar-shaped cells. Occasionally, some lobules extend posteriorly behind the Glands of KrauwcMuller mUIoCI. \J--- Goblet cell Aponeurosis oflevator palpebrae superiori. musele Tarsal pia Ie 'iI'---- containing meibomian gland Orbiculari. CKuli mUlde --~- ~~ Orbicularis oculi iH:'!t--- muscle Hair follicl. AOlium Moll gland Glands of Krause Glands of Manz Glands of Krau~ (0-2. averog_ 1) cB ing include skin and cutaneous appendages. muscle, connective tis-sue, and conjunctiva. IReproduced from: Newell FW. Ophthalmology: Principles and Concepts. St. Louis: CV Mosby; 1986, with permission.) B. The skin surface IS), the orbicularis oculi muscle 100), the tarsus IT)and the conjunctiva (c] are evident in this histologic section of an eyelid IH&E x3.3). C. Multiple foci of accessory lacrimal gland tissue are present in the eyelids. IReproduced from: Newell FW. Ophthalmology: Principles and Concepts. St. Louis: CV Mosby; 1986, with permission.) deposit secretions into ducts opening onto the eyelids. A valve is evi-dent in this duct of a meibomian gland. eyelid and open into the follicles of the eyelashes the meibomian glands. The palpebral conjunctiva is immedi-ately beneath the tarsus atthe bottom ofthis figureLevator m. Medial rectus m . Annulus of Zinn fibrous covering, the cartilagenous trochlea, the lac-rimal gland, and the extraocular muscles. The trochlea and the lacrimal gland are located within the superonasal and superotemporal aspects of the orbit respectively. Some of the extraocular muscles originate from a ring of fibrous tissue in the posterior orbit known as the annulus of Zinno (Reproduced from: Tasman W, Jaeger EA, eds. Duane's Clinical Ophthal-mology. Vol. 2. Philadelphia, PA: JBLippincott; 1989,with permission.) globe. Most cells are serous in type and contain scattered intracytoplasmic fat droplets and granules. Mucinous cells similar to those of salivary glands are not usually present in the acini but may be identified in the ducts. In addi-tion to secretory cells, the lining of the larger peripheral ducts within the lacrimal gland contains myoepithelial cells shaped epithelial cells. Scattered lymphocytes and plasma cells are normally present in the gland. tissues of the orbit IH&E xl0). external to the serous cells. Occasional lymphocytes and plasma cells are commonly present between the acini of the lacrimal gland. The orbit contains the cranial nerves, which innervate the extrinsic muscles of the eye (oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves) and branches of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve, as well as the parasympathetic and sympathetic nerves that innervate the cornea, conjunctiva, and the muscles of the ciliary body and iris. Neurons of the ciliary ganglion, which is located near the optic nerve close to the orbital apex and which measures approximately 2 mm in diameter, receive parasympathetic and sympathetic nerve fibers. Other constituents of the orbit include smooth muscle and the arc-shaped structure, through which the tendon of the superior oblique muscle passes before insertion upon the eyeball. The trochlea is the only cartilaginous structure normally present in the orbit. It arises from the superior nasal aspect of the frontal bone. structure of the normal orbit, envelops the skeletal muscle fibers of the superior oblique muscle ISOM) IH&E x5).Puncta Lacrimal gland Superior canaliculus Inferior canaliculus trated here. The lacrimal gland is located in the superotemporal aspect of the orbit and contributes secretions to the tear film. Tears enter the canaliculi through the puncta and drain through the nasolacrimal sac and duct, to eventually reach the inferior meatus within the nose. Lymphatic channels do not exist in the orbit according to traditional teaching; but this point is disputed because lymphangiomas develop in the orbit on rare occasions. The orbit normally lacks lymphoid tissue but contains scat-tered lymphocytes. These cells presumably give rise to the monoclonal and polyclonallymphoid proliferations that fre-quently develop within the orbit, creating diagnostic and prognostic difficulty for the pathologist.