Clinical arthritis is the consequence of a breakdown in the joint's normal function; that is to say, it involves loss of capacity for the articulating surfaces to move over one another easily, loss of joint stability, and almost always pain. The loss of freedom of motion may be the result of a change in joint shape that results in severe incongruities or, on the other hand, a change in the tissue matrices that affects their mechanical properties. Instability may result from alterations in ligamentous support and neuromuscular control. Pain may originate in the bone as a result of mal-distribution of load; in the synovium as a result of reactive synovitis; or in the muscle as a consequence of reflex spasm. Malfunction of a joint results from acute or chronic morbid conditions that produce either of the following: Anatomic alterations in the shape of the articulating surfaces (eg, a trans articular or subarticular fracture, increased modeling activity, Paget's disease, or endo-crine disturbances eg, acromegaly). Loss of structural integrity of the cartilage tissue or of the support structures around the joint [eg, by enzymatic destruction in inflammatory arthritis (sep-tic or rheumatic arthritis) or, more commonly, trau-matic injury]. Alterations in the mechanical properties of the tissue matrices making up the joint (eg, brittle collagen as occurs in ochronosis). During the past century, several types of arthritis have been well delineated on the basis of their characteristic clinical presentations and their morbid anatomy. These include the infectious arthritides, both granulomatous and pyogenic; the metabolic arthritides (eg, gout, pseudogout, and ochronosis); and the arthritis that com-plicates many cases of aseptic subchondral bone necrosis. The various "rheumatic syndromes" have been classified according to their clinical and immunologic characteristics; histologically, these inflammatory arthriti-des show chronic synovitis and a destructive pattern involv-ing the bone, cartilage, and periarticular structures. How-ever, they are difficult to differentiate from each other solely by microscopic examination. Even when these various etiologies have been con-sidered, there remain a large number of cases of arthritis affecting especially certain small joints of the hands and feet and some larger joints, of which the most common are the hip and knee. These cases, which run a chronic course, are essentially noninflammatory and usually occur in older indi-viduals. The clinical presentation and morbid anatomy in these cases are similar enough for all of them to be classified under the general appellation of osteoarthritis ordegenerative joint disease. In the majority of cases, the etiology is unclear; however, the important role of prior mechanical trauma is not in dispute and the onset of osteoarthritis in middle age can often be traced in sports-related injuries in adolescence and young adulthood. Repetitive impact loading, such as occurs in running on hard surfaces with poorly designed shoes, is recognized as contributing to knee arthritis. A study designed to understand the relationship between impact energy and mass on injury modalities in the canine knee has shown that injuries were typically more frequent and more severe with the largest mass at each energy level. Histologic analysis of the patellae revealed cartilage injuries at low energy, with deep injuries in the underlying bone at higher energies. Alteration in Shape A change in joint shape is characteristic of most forms of arthritis. In the inflammatory arthritides tissue loss results from destruction. On the other hand, although bone and cartilage loss play an important part in the osteoarthritic process, it is the addition of new bone and cartilage in the form of osteophytes, particularly at the joint periphery and sometimes beneath the articular surface, that forms one of the characteristic features of the disease. We now recognize that a change in joint shape-either sudden, as with a fracture, or gradual, as in acromegaly orother metabolic disturbances such as Paget's disease-may play an important role in the etiology of arthritis. In other words although a change in the shape of the joint is an expected result of arthritis, nevertheless a change in shape may also be the cause of arthritis.