Since the 1971 discovery of the myofibroblast in granulat-ing wounds, one cannot help but be fascinated with the subject as the body of knowledge related to this pivotal cell expands, most recently through the contributions of cellular and molecular biology. Itwould appear that following induction of a large skin wound, resting fibroblasts are triggered through the effects of mechanical forces and possibly yet unknown cytokines released at the wound site to assume a proto-myofibroblasticphenotype characterized by the presence of stress fibers that contain cytoplasmic actin isoforms. These cells con-tinue to modulate and eventually assume a differentiated myofibroblasticphenotype characterized by a-smooth muscle actin incorporation into stress fibers and the for-mation of specialized "supermature" focal adhesions. This process is regulated by TGF-~l and ED-A cellular fibro-nectin and results in connective tissue remodeling with an increase of extracellular matrix synthesis, collagen type III in particular, and tissue retraction. Recent studies strongly indicate that the forces generated by myofibroblast stress fibers produce isometric tension; this is different from the reversible contraction taking place in smooth muscle cells and involves the Rho/Rho-kinase path-way, as well as regulated activity of myosin phosphatase. As wound healing approaches completion, genes that encode for apoptotic proteins are expressed to initiate myo-fibroblastic cell death; the formerly cellular wound is then converted into a poorly cellular scar. Commensurate with this, there is a shift from collagen type IIIto collagen type I gene expression and synthesis, resulting in the deposition of type I collagen that provides strength to the developing scar. Furthermore, cytokines that stimulate extracellular matrix synthesis early on are repressed once wound closure is completed and a functional basement membrane has been synthesized; this suggests the existence of a feedback loop. It is likely that deviations from this finely orches-trated process contribute to the development of hypertro-phic scars and keloids. Regarding the diverse assortment of quasi-neoplastic myofibroblastic proliferative processes, the cellular/molecular mechanisms central to their pathogenesis remain essen-tially unexplored. Turning to the myofibroblastic response associated with diverse invasive and metastatic carcinomas, it was originally proposed that this represented an expression of host response to the cancer. The hypothesis appears valid today, although one could posit whether this is beneficial since many of these cancers, despite the attending desmo-plasia, continue to exact lives. Yet, death, in these settings, stems largely from the ability of the neoplastic cell to enter vascular channels and disseminate. It appears increasingly plausible that these myofibroblasts, while affecting contrac-tion and elaborating collagens and other extracellular matrix components, also release enzymes that facilitate tissue and vascular invasion. Whether the myofibroblastic stromal reaction is beneficial in certain desmoplastic carcinomas and noxious in others lacking this type of stromal reaction and desmoplasia remains an open question. Nevertheless, during the daily practice the surgical pathologist witnesses carcinomas with an exuberant desmoplastic stromal reaction, usually associated with a more favorable prognosis as opposed to carcinomas with a feeble or absent stromal reaction which more often are associated with an aggressive behaviour and poor prognosis. Myofibroblasts not only release enzymes facilitating tissue reaction. A.ln a healing bacterial abscess, the cicatriz-ing layer is at the periphery, and the two layers con-taining myofibroblasts (exudativo-productive and exu-dative, respectively) are developing toward the center. B.ln infiltrating ductal breast carcinoma, the cicatrizing area is in the center and myofibroblasts are disposed variably in the peripheral invasive cellular front of the carcinoma; precocious (preceding the invasive carci-noma cells), simultaneous (amongst the invasive carci-noma cells), and late (following the invasive carcinoma celis). In normal wound healing the stromal reaction is centripetal; whereas in invasive ductal breast carcino-mas, the stromal reaction is centrifugal, indicating that cancers are wounds that do not heal.H~UHG BACTERIAL ABCESSMYOfJBROBLASnC STROMAL REACTlON IN lHFll.JRAl1NG BREAST CARCINOMA r Cntrp4ltal .1I0m31 M3cUon and vascular invasion but in some instances also enzymes which stabilize the extracellular matrix, ie, favouring cross linking of collagen type I and elastins, a crucial function for the stabilization of the extracellular matrix. Recently, the mechanisms regulating the cross talk between tumor cells and stroma myofibroblasts are in the process of being clarified. Thus, it appears that the concomi-tant production of growth factors and/or cytokines (such as TGF-~l, hepatocyte growth factor, or stromal cell-derived factor-I) and synthesis of extracellular matrix compo-nents by stromal myofibroblasts stimu-lates the invasive properties of malignant epithelial cells. Ifone considers that during development connective tissue remodeling plays an important role in epi-thelial morphogenesis, it is possible to conceive that cross talk between stroma and epithelium regulates both physiologic and pathologic epithelial organization. Clearly, future studies of human cancer should focus not only on the neoplastic cell, but also on the regulation of extra-cellular matrix synthesis and the cell-to-extracellular matrix interactions of tumors. Thirty years ago, we proposed that similarities might exist between the process of wound healing and the stro-mal response to neoplastic invasion. This assumption may also be extended to quasi-neoplastic proliferative con-ditions. During normal wound healing and within nodules of Dupuytren's disease and possibly other quasi-neoplastic proliferations, the myofibro-blastic/fibroblastic reaction appears to be centripetal (Fig-ure 6.29A), whereas within neoplastic invasion this reac-tion is centrifugal, indicating that cancers are wounds that do not heal. The underlying cellular/ molecular mechanisms explaining these fundamental dif-ferences, including the presence, delay, or absence of apop-tosis, remain to be explored. Thanks to the work of a number of laboratories, many aspects of myofibroblast biology, for example, multiple origin, phenotypic features and contractile mechanisms,are now well if not fully established. However many other aspects remain mysterious and will allegedly be the object of intense exploratory work during the coming years. Among these last aspects we feel that interactions of myofibroblasts with other local cells as well as with the extracellular matrix appear particularly promising in order to furnish new insights on their behavior during developmental, physiologic, and pathologic processes and possibly to furnish new tools for therapeutic strategies.