Ultrastructural As initially described in granulation tissue and nodules of Dupuytren's disease, myofibroblasts share morpho-logic features in common with fibroblasts and smooth mus-cle cells. Fibroblasts of adult animals and humans display a slender fusiform and smooth, contoured nucleus, a well-developed Golgi area, numerous and often dilated cisternae of rough endoplasmic reticulum, scattered mitochondria, and small numbers of microfilaments, the latter sometimes arranged in discrete bundles beneath the plasma mem-brane. Cell contours are generally smooth or display a few short cytoplasmic extensions. Plasmalemmal attachment plaques, dense patches or dense bands, basal lamina, pinocytotic vesicles, intercellular junctions, and cell-to-stroma attachment sites are absent. Smooth muscle cells are enveloped by a continuous basal lamina. Their plasma membrane is studded with plasmalemmal attachment plaques or so-called membrane-associated dense bodies, dense plaques, dense patches or dense bands, and numerous pinocytotic vesicles. Inter-cellular gap junctions and adherens junctions are present. The cytoplasm is laden with bundles of microfilaments, usually disposed parallel to the long axis of the cell, among which numerous dense bodies are interspersed. The mate-rial of the dense bodies appears similar to the one forming the dense bands, which are attached to the cell membrane in certain vascular smooth muscle cells. Some dense bodies are in continuity with dense bands. Dense bodies and dense bands probably correspond to Z-lines of striated muscle fibers. In both structures, o-actinin has been demonstrated by immunohistochemical techniques. Force transmis-sion from the contractile apparatus to the cell membrane in smooth muscle cells occurs via the insertion of bundles of actin filaments into the dense bands. Transmission of the contractile force occurs also across cell membranes of smooth muscle cells and from cell membranes to the stroma. Although it seems clear that the traction generated by the myofilaments is transmitted to the dense bands, the exact mechanism of the transmission of the traction across the cell membrane is not fully understood. The fibronec-tin receptor as a transmembrane glycoprotein complex has extracellular binding sites for fibronectin, suggesting spe-cific interactions between cytoplasmic actin filaments and extracellular fibronectin fibers across the plasma membrane at cell-to-matrix attachment sites. A close associa-tion between bundles of cytoplasmic actin filaments (stress fibers) and bundles of extracellular fibronectin fibrils has been observed in transformed fibroblasts and in myofibro-blasts of granulation tissue in vivo; this structure, desig-nated fibronexus, is specialized for enhanced cell-to-matrix connections. Contractile forces from cell to cell are transmitted through adherens or intermediate junctions, which are symmetrical structures formed by two comple-mentary dense bands that match each other in adjacent smooth muscle cells. Their nuclei are elongated with blunt ends and are deformed by shallow invaginations. In contrast to fibroblasts, the Colgi area and the rough endo-plasmic reticulum are poorly developed. Myofibroblasts disclose irregular, often stellate, cellular outlines with numerous and long cytoplas-mic extensions and are connected by intermediate or adhe-rens junctions and by gap junctions, the latter considered as low-resistance path-ways for intercellular communications. In addition, myofibroblasts are partly enveloped by a basal lamina and display plasmalemmal attachment plaques, dense patches or dense bands, and pinocytotic vesicles. They are also connected by micro tendons to the extracel-lular matrix by cell-to-stroma attachment sites through the fibronexus, a transmembrane complex of intracellular micro filament bundles in apparent continuity with extracel-lular fibronectin fibers. At the surface of myofibroblasts, three types of fibronexus are observed:plaque-like; track-like; and tandem associations. These cell-to-stroma attachment sites are well-developed and numerous in myofibroblasts compared with their atten-uated appearance in smooth muscle cells. Myofibroblasts contain numerous bundles of cytoplasmic microfilaments, usually arranged parallel to the long axis of the cell and among which are interspersed numerous dense bodies. As in vascular smooth muscle cells, these structures may be in continuity with dense bands or plasmalemmal attachment plaques. Rough endoplasmic reticulum and Colgi areas are well developed. The nucleus displays deep indentations, an ultrastructural feature that has been correlated with cellular contraction in several systems. Several nuclear bodies are usu-ally present, and nucleoli are conspicuous. Myofibroblasts generally are surrounded by substantial amounts of extra-cellular matrix. A precise definition of the myofibroblast is an issue of major importance for the surgical pathologist. In our opin-ion, a myofibroblast can only be ultimately defined by ultra-structure, since immunohistochemical studies reveal that myofibroblasts have a heterogeneous and complex pattern of protein expression. The three essential ultrastructural ele-ments that define a myofibroblast are: stress fibers (ie, bundles of micro- filaments with interspersed dense bodies running parallel to the long axis of the cell, commonly located beneath the cell membrane); well-developed cell-to-stroma attachment sites; and intercellular intermediate and gap junctions. This definition has now been accepted by several major textbooks in regard to the issue of myofibroblasts in tumor pathology. We do not deny that the light and immunohistochemical micro-scopic differences between smooth muscle cells and myofi-broblasts may be subtle, especially when considering degrees of differentiation of smooth muscle and myofibroblastic pro-liferations. Nonetheless, the myofibroblast is defined as a highly differentiated cell by ultrastructure alone. Histologic Although morphologically defined with the electron micro-scope, myofibroblasts disclose several typical histologic traits that permit their presumptive recognition in routine paraffin or in plastic sections in settings in which they previously were identified by ultrastructure. The cells are usually large, spindle-shaped, and often stellate with several long cytoplasmic extensions, and they possess distinct acidophilic to amphophilic and fibrillar cytoplasm with cable-like condensations run-ning through the subplasmalemmal cytoplasm parallel to the long axis. The nuclei often are indented or reveal stran-gulations of nuclear segments, a feature thought to reflect cellular contraction, and contain finely granular, regularly dispersed chromatin and conspicuous nucleoli. Well-differentiated myofibroblasts with the previously men-tioned traits are observed in poorly collagenized and edema-tous areas of various settings in which they were originally shape and cytoplasmic extensions, well-developed rough endoplasmic reticulum, and bundle of cytoplasmic microfilaments Iarrow) with numerous dense bodies running through the cytoplasm giving rise to "strangulation" of a nuclear seqrnent.Isource: Schilrch W, Seemayer T, Lagace R, et al. The intermediate filament cytoskeleton of myofibroblasts. Virchows Arch A.1984; 403:323-336.) B. Microtendons in appar-ent continuity with bundles of cytoplasmic microfilaments. C. Cytoplasm of myofibroblast demonstrating basal lamina larrows), pinocytotic vesicles Iarrowheads), and plasmalemma I attachment plaques. D. Intermediate or adherens junction between two cytoplasmic exten-sions of myofibroblasts. E. Gap junction Iarrow), followed by intermediate junction topen arrow) joining two rnvofibroblasts.Illranvl acetate and lead citrate; A, x9900; 8,x25,000; C,x18,200; 0,x39,000; E,x78,000.) productive layer of human granulation tissue, approximately 15 days old. Myofibroblasts disclose stellate, spiderlike shapes with long cytoplasmic extensions and distinct fibrillar cytoplasm with cable-like sub plasmalemma I condensations (hematoxylin-ph loxine-saffron). described; for example, in granulation tissue, in zones of early invasive carcinomas, in invasive and metastatic car-cinomas characterized by retraction and desmoplasia, and in several other proliferative conditions. In heavily collage-nized zones, myofibroblasts are difficult to recognize with junctions in cultured myofibroblasts. Rat lung myofibroblasts were cultured on planar glass substrates and immunostained for «-srnooth muscle actin as a component of contractile stress fibers, paxil-lin as a component of cell-matrix focal adhesions, and ~-catenin as a marker for cell-cell adherens junctions. Myofibroblasts form large, "superrnature" focal adhesions with the extracellular matrix and adherens junctions with adjacent cells; both structures are located at the terminal portion of o-smooth muscle actin-positive stress fibers.the light microscope since they correspond ultrastructurally to poorly developed myofibroblasts or fibroblasts. It is possible that in the near future myofibroblasts might be clearly recognized and defined by immunohistochemical examination of the complex stress fiber-associated cell-to-matrix junctions, using multiple labeling techniques and employing confocal laser microscopy on paraffin sections. To date no unique molecular marker has been found to unmistakably identify the myofibroblast. Immunohistochemical For a better understanding and appreciation of the vari-ous cytoskeletal phenotypes of myofibroblasts, a detailed description of cytoskeletal proteins of muscular tissues, particularly smooth muscle cells, is presented. Specific pro-teins have been characterized during the differentiation of muscular tissues. These proteins have also served as reliable markers of smooth muscle and fibroblast adapta-tion to physiologic and pathologic conditions. Desmin is a muscle differentiation marker that appears early in embryogenesis. This intermediate filament dimensional collagen gels. Rat lung myofibroblasts were cultured in restrained collagen gels and immunostained for «-smooth muscle actin in stress fibers, vinculin in cell-matrix adhesions, and ED-A fibronectin in the extracellular matrix. The image has been recon-structed from the overlay of 10 optical sections of 0.2 11macquired with a laser scanning confocal microscope. Yellow color results from addi-tion of red and green signals and indicates colocalization of «-smooth muscle actin and vinculin; white shows colocalization of both proteins with ED-A fibronectin. Note that extracellular fibronectin fibrils are co-orientated with intracellular stress fibers; they also penetrate in the surrounding extracellular matrix in the continuation of stress fibers. This organization corresponds to the fibronexus originally described by means of electron microscopy. protein, however, does not allow one to distinguish between different muscle types. Moreover, desmin is pres-ent in stromal cells of several organs, which traditionally were considered fibroblastic in nature. When smooth muscle cells are cultured, desmin disappears. Smooth muscle myosin is a precise marker of smooth muscle dif-ferentiation. This contractile protein, however, disappears rapidly from smooth muscle cells in several conditions in vivo and also early in culture. These findings sug-gest that smooth muscle myosin is a more reliable marker of smooth muscle differentiation than smooth muscle ori-gin. Vascular smooth muscle cells are heterogeneous with respect to intermediate filament proteins. Most contain vimentin as their sole detectable intermediate filament; a lesser proportion also expresses desmin. Parenchymal smooth muscle cells of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary tracts represent a homogeneous population in which desmin is almost the exclusive intermediate filament protein. With regard to actin expression, at least six isoforms are defined in mammals: Two non-muscle actins that are present in all cells, two smooth muscle actins that are present in all cells and two sar-comeric actins. The emergence of distinct muscle and cytoplasmic actin isoforms is phylo-genetically ancestral, dating before chordates. The non-muscle actins, the so-called cytoplasmic actins, are considered the archetypes because of their pres-ence in all non-muscle cells, including eukaryotic unicellu-lar organisms. According to amino acid patterns, a-skeletal actin represents the most differentiated isoform. At the protein level, a-skeletal actin is most closely related to a-cardiac actin, whereas a-smooth-muscle actin is more closely related to the cytoplasmic actins. Both a-cardiac and a-smooth muscle actin represent embryonic or fetal actin isoforms, as they are expressed during skeletal myogenesis. The six actin isoforms may also be determined by RNA extraction and Northern blot hybridization using specific probes and, more recently, with specific anti-bodies for the six actin isoforms. Vascular smooth muscle cells are characterized by a predominance of the a-smooth muscle actin isoform. In contrast, parenchymal smooth muscle cells contain large amounts of the y-smooth muscle actin isoform. The pattern of a-, ~- and y-actin isoform expression varies in smooth muscle tissues of adult mammals. This pattern varies also during non-neo-plastic pathologic conditions, such as atheromatosis, but changes only slightly in uterine leiomyomas, compared with normal myometrium. During the early months of life, 50% of cells in the aortic media lack a-smooth muscle actin, whereas a-smooth muscle actin-negative cells consti-tute less than 1%in the adult. These findings demonstrate that, at least in arteries, differentiation of smooth muscle cells is completed after birth. These observations col-lectively suggest that the pattern of a-actin isoform expres-sion and, particularly, the expression of a-smooth muscleactin in vascular smooth muscle cells are related to the degree of smooth muscle differentiation. Pericytes resemble vascular smooth muscle cells. In a meticulously executed treatise published in 1923, Zim-mermann showed that pre- and postcapillary pericytes are connected to vascular smooth muscle cells. In 1991, an elegant study showed that pre- and postcapillary peri-cytes indeed expressed a-smooth muscle actin, whereas the midcapillary pericytes fail to express this actin isoform. Pericytes were also shown to resemble vascular smooth muscle cells by their intermediate filament expression. Both cell types express vimentin or vimentin and desmin. In addition, the intermediate filament composition of pericytes discloses species and tissue differences similar to those observed in vascular smooth muscle cells. Myofibroblasts in normal tissue, granulation tissue, and pathologic tissues disclose five cytoskeletal phenotypes: Phenotype V,represented by cells expressing only vimen-tin; phenotype VA,represented by cells expressing vimentin and a-smooth muscle actin; phenotype VAD, represented by cells expressing vimentin, a-smooth muscle actin, and desmin; phenotype VD, represented by cells expressing vimentin and desmin; and phenotype VA M, represent-ing myofibroblasts expressing vimentin, a-smooth muscle actin, and smooth muscle myosin heavy chains, with and without desmin. The five phenotypes are readily defined in frozen and paraffin sections using immunohistochemis-try, employing single, double, or triple staining techniques. Myofibroblasts of the various immunophenotypes may also only express the ~-and y-cytoplasmic actins, although it is more common that they express in addition a-smooth muscle actin. This has led to the misconception that, for a cell to be classified as a myofibroblast, it must express a-smooth mus-cle actin. This is not true, as cells other than myofibroblasts express a-smooth muscle actin. There are situations in which cells have the ultrastructural characteristics of myofibro-blasts but do not express a-smooth muscle actin; for example, interstitial cells in alveolar septa and the early phase of granulation tissue. For this phenotype the name of proto-myofibroblast has been proposed. Within experimental and human granulation tissues, myofibroblasts temporarily express a marker of smooth muscle differentiation, a-smooth muscle actin, which dis-appears after wound closure. This suggests that differ-entiation of myofibroblasts toward smooth muscle cells is only partial, at least during normal wound healing, because myofibroblasts in this condition never express desmin or smooth muscle myosin heavy chain isoforms. Recently, the cytoskeletal features of myofibroblasts during wound heal-ing, Dupuytren's disease, and the stroma of mammary carci-nomas were investigated. In these three conditions, myofi-broblasts disclosed a progressive differentiation toward the smooth muscle phenotype. Whereas myofibroblasts during wound healing express only a-smooth muscle actin, myofibroblasts in Dupuytren's disease express smooth muscle myosin heavy chains, at least in some cases. An important proportion of myofibroblasts within the stroma of all cases of mammary carcinomas express, in addition to a-smooth muscle actin, desmin and smooth muscle myo-sin heavy chain isoforms. In culture, different conditions have been established to drive the expression of even late smooth muscle cell markers in fibroblasts. This sug-gests that fibroblastic cells are capable of proceeding well along the lines of smooth muscle cell differentiation. How-ever, tissue myofibroblasts have not been shown to express smoothelin, a terminal smooth muscle cell differ-entiation marker, in any of the pathologic states examined. Hence, smoothelin expression may be used as a dis-crimination marker between the two cells. Considering these data collectively, it is apparent that the distinction between smooth muscle cells and myofi-broblasts remains complex at the immunohistochemical level and that no single immunophenotype is distinctive for myofibroblasts. Biochemical Myofibroblasts possess not only contractile forces, but also synthetic properties. Four major groups of macromolecules comprise the extracellular matrix: collagens; glyco-proteins; proteo-glycans; and, elastins with their associated proteins. Myofibro-blasts possess synthetic properties for several extracellular matrix components: Collagen types I, III, IV, and V, glycoproteins, and proteoglycans such as fibronectin, lam-inin, and tenascin. In addition, liver myofibroblasts in the murine schistosomiasis model secrete lysyl oxidase, an enzyme that initiates the first step in the cross-linking of collagen and elastin, a crucial function for the stabilization of the extracellular matrix. Concerning collagen synthesis in granulating wounds, the collagen initially produced is type III.This form of col-lagen imparts a measure of plasticity to the wound in the early phase of healing. It has also been recently suggested that collagen type III plays a role in myofibroblast differ-entiation. When granulation tissue is resorbed follow-ing wound closure, myofibroblasts disappear through the process of apoptosis and the more rigid type I collagen is biochemically identified. In similar fashion, the proliferative cellular phase of palmar fibromatosis and the young edematous mesenchyme of areas corresponding to early stromal invasion of breast carcinomas, both rich in myofibroblasts, contain increased amounts of type IIIcol-lagen. Increased amounts of type V collagen are biochemically identified in desmoplastic human breast car-cinomas, apparently also produced by myofibroblasts. Pharmacologic Strips of granulation tissue exposed in vitro to a variety of pharmacologic agents contract and relax in a manner analogous to smooth muscle. Prostaglandin F i-bradykinin, serotonin, endothelin-1, histamine, angiotensin, norepi-nephrine, epinephrine, and vasopressin initiate contrac-tion. The intensity of the response depends on the origin, age, and initial degree of contraction of the granulation tissue tested. Prostaglandins Eland E2 and papaverine induce relaxation in tissues in a contracted state. Cytochalasin B abolishes the contraction of granulation tis-sue, probably the result of microfilament disruption. Trocinate, another inhibitor of smooth muscle contraction, has been reported to decrease contraction when applied topically on rabbit wounds. Strips of cirrhotic liver, when exposed to smooth muscle stimulating agents, contract significantly when compared with strips of normal liver. Pronounced myofibroblas-tic interstitial fibrosis is produced in lungs of bleomycin-injected rats. When strips of these fibrotic lungs are exposed to acetylcholine, epinephrine, and a K+ -depolarizing solu-tion, the force developed is approximately twice that of nor-mal lung tissue strips. The relative reactivity to various stimulating agents of myofibroblasts from diverse sources varies. For instance, acetylcholine causes contraction of strips of fibrotic lungs but not of granulation tissue from a skin wound or a granuloma pouch, and serotonin induces retraction of the granuloma pouch but not strips from a skin wound. In addition to this heterogeneity in the pharma-cologic reactivity of granulation tissue strips from various sources, there are also differences between the response of strips of granulation tissue and strips of smooth muscle; the former reach their peak contraction slower but maintain it longer than the latter. Endothelin-1 was originally isolated from the condi-tioned medium of cultured porcine endothelial cells and was shown to be the most potent vasopressor substance yet characterized. Endothelin-1 may be an endogenous modulator of myofibroblast-mediated contraction because it causes reversible and concentration-dependent contrac-tion of granuloma pouch granulation tissue, the 21-day granulation tissue being the most responsive. This response can be inhibited by calcium antagonists. The vasopres-sor effect of endothelin-l possibly is controlled and medi-ated through the action of cytokines, among others, TGF-~l, which, in turn, is able to induce a-smooth muscle actin expression in fibroblasts and myofibroblasts. More recently it has been shown that the intracellu-lar administration of the N-terminal peptide of a-smooth muscle actin, the actin isoform responsible for myofibro-blast contraction, decreases force generation by myofibroblasts in vitro and inhibits wound contraction in vivo; this may represent a useful tool for the control of tissue retraction and remodeling during several pathologic situations. Whereas various agents were shown to reveal their activity on granulation tissue in vitro, the exact mech-anism leading to myofibroblast contraction in vivo remains to be elucidated. Mechanisms of contraction have mostly been studied in vitro and will be discussed in the following section. MECHANISTIC ASPECTS OF THE MYOFIBROBlAST In Vitro Culture Studies When myofibroblasts from various sources (granulating wounds, Dupuytren's disease, and invasive breast cancer) are cultured, they maintain to a certain extent their unique resemblance to fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells. Cul-tured fibroblasts may express different phenotypic features, and a spectrum of differentiation steps has been described. Proteins such as desmin and smooth muscle myosin heavy chains are also variably expressed by cultured fibro-blasts derived from different organs or pathologic tissues, but expression is generally low and absent in several pop-ulations. Myofibroblasts cultured from skin wound granulation tissue maintain some biologic features differ-ent from those of dermal fibroblasts. If the growth rate and the actin concentration of cultured fibroblasts from normal dermis and myofibroblasts of human granula-tion tissue are compared, myofibroblasts grow slower than fibroblasts and contain a significantly higher con-centration of actin. Wound-healing fibroblasts were shown to develop greater contractile properties than dermal fibroblasts. Similarly, fibroblastic cells cultured from Dupuytren's nodules maintain biologic features different from those of normal dermis or fascial fibroblasts yet are similar to those of neoplastic or embryonic fibroblasts. However, it is important to state that the percentage of cells exhibiting myofibroblast features in culture does not neces-sarily reflect their proportion in the tissue of origin. When fibroblast cultures from various species, including man, were established using cloning and sub cloning techniques, a reproducible percentage of cells was positive for a-smooth muscle actin. This concept of fibroblast heterogene-ity is now well-established in vitro and in vivo (106-108). Alpha-smooth muscle actin is expressed by fibroblasts cultured from the eye lens, mammary gland, liver perisi-nusoidal cells, and glomerular mesangial cells, sites where stromal cells normally expressing this protein do not occur but which may give rise to reactive stromal cells expressing a-smooth muscle actin in pathologic conditions. It is likely that a-smooth muscle actin expression in cul-tured fibroblasts stems from the culture conditions imposed upon the fibroblasts. The level of a-smooth muscle actin expression and myofibroblast differentiation changes with increasing culture passage number, serum conditions, and culture confluence. Fibroblastic modulation to a myofibro-blast phenotype in vitro may thus reflect a cellular response to their altered biochemical and mechanical environment, somewhat analogous to that occurs in wounds. Myofibroblast Differentiation: A Two-stage Model Fibroblasts cultured on planar culture dishes rapidly attach to the wall of the container and move across its surface;adherence and mobility are attributed to the de novo devel-opment of a system of micro filament bundles called stress fibers. These may measure up to 2 urnin diameter and connect to the extracellular matrix at sites of focal adhe-sions and to adjacent cells at sites of adherens junctions. Initially, stress fibers are mainly composed of cytoplasmic actins, as shown by immunofluo-rescence and immunoelectron microscopy with specific antibodies. Several studies have shown that stress fibers also contain actin-associated proteins such as myosin, tropomyosin, n-actinin, and filamin. The formation of stress fibers and cell-matrix adhesions is in sharp contrast to the cortical arrangement of actin in fibroblasts in most normal connective tissues and represents the first step in the development of the myofibroblast phenotype. As previ-ously discussed, the term proto-myofibroblast was proposed for fibroblasts with contractile stress fibers that do not express a-smooth muscle actin; proto-myofibroblast and V-type myofibroblast are to be used synonymously. Development of the proto-myofibroblast is predomi-nantly controlled by the mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix and requires the permanent feedback between intracellular and extracellular tension. Stress fiber formation in fibroblasts on rigid glass or plastic surfaces is increased after contractile activity stimulation and is lost upon application of inhibitors of contraction. In contrast, fibroblasts grown on compliant sub-strates fail to develop proto-myofibroblastic features even in the presence of contraction agonists. When embedded in a three-dimensional gel of newly polymer-ized collagen, fibroblasts acquire a dendritic morphology similar to that in normal dermis; they extend and retract long processes, possibly to explore and organize the new environment. In free-floating collagen gels the forces developed by such processes lead to collagen gel condensation. However, since collagen fibers are free to move, overall matrix stress does not develop, and fibroblasts maintain their dendritic appearance. In contrast, collagen reorganization in restrained gels pro-duces matrix stiffening and increases global stress, induc-ing alignment of fibroblasts along the lines of tension and the formation of stress fibers. Similarly, after stress-release of restrained collagen gels, proto-myofibroblasts rapidly loose stress fibers and matrix contacts. Importantly, fibroblasts are capable of adjusting their contractile activity according to the external load; controlled stress-release of collagen gels in a culture increases short-term fibroblast contractile activity, whereas gel stretching leads to acute fibroblast relaxation, a phe-nomenon that has been termed tensional homeostasis. A similar mechanism of proto-myofibroblast develop-ment appears to apply in vivo. In most normal connective tissues, fibroblasts are protected from external tensile stress by their surrounding matrix. This situation changes dramatically with an altered microenvironment, such as when a dermal wound is provisionally filled with a clot of fibrin and blood platelets, which, in conjunction with white blood cells, release a variety of cytokines. These changes stimulate fibroblasts to migrate into the wound bed, where they proliferate and initiate restoration of the dermis by secreting and organizing the dermal matrix. The increasing number of migrating fibroblasts enhances matrix rigidity by applying tractional forces to the newly formed granulation tissue, ultimately leading to the development of stress fibers. A number of studies have demonstrated that mechan-ical stress is also prerequisite for the second step of myo-fibroblast development, signaled by the expression of a-smooth muscle actin in stress fibers. In vitro, the level of a-smooth muscle actin expression increases with increasing matrix rigidity, as demonstrated by grow-ing differentiated myofibroblasts in collagen substrates or on synthetic elastomers exhibiting different degrees of stiffness. In vivo, application of mechani-cal stress to granulation tissue fibroblasts by splinting the edges of rat full-thickness wounds with a plastic frame accelerates expression of a-smooth muscle actin compared to normally healing wounds; stress release by removal of the frame rapidly leads to the disassembly of stress fibers and loss of a-smooth muscle actin expression. Similar observations have been made after stretching human burn wound scar tissue. Once myofibroblast activities have been initiated it is clearly difficult to control and to terminate its destructive activity. Partly, this is caused by the constant mechanical feedback that the cells receive from the extracellular matrix: Stiffer matrix leads to higher myofibroblast contraction and matrix secretion, which again leads to further matrix stiff-ening. Consequently, fibrotic lesions are stiffer compared with the tissue compliance of the most non-fibrotic organs. In clinical practice, the stiff scar tissue that surrounds epithelial tumors can be used to detect tumors in situ with tissue elastography imaging methods. Tissue stiffening dur-ing fibrosis obstructs organs whose mechanical properties are important for their function, such as the heart, lung, skin, and vessels. Increased stiffness of a damaged organ is not necessarily associated with scar formation but can precede and promote fibrosis as shown after liver injury. It is unclear what mechanisms promote tissue stiff-ening even before inflammatory or regenerative cells arrive at a site of injury but involvement of collagen crosslinking enzymes, such as lysyl oxidase like-2, has been proposed to playa role. In addition to mechanical stress, transformation of the proto-myofibroblast into the differentiated myofibro-blast requires the concerted action of cytokines and spe-cific components of the extracellular matrix. It is accepted that TGF-~1 is the major growth factor inducing myofibro-blast differentiation. More recently, thrombin and endothelin-l have been shown to induce myofibroblast differentiation. It has been demonstrated in experimental animals that the subcutaneous administra-tion of granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor promotes the development of granulation tis-sue rich in a-smooth muscle actin-positive myofibroblasts; this action, however, is indirect and could be medi-ated by TGF-~. TGF-~-mediated expression of a-smooth muscle actin depends upon the presence of the fibronectin splice variant ED-A fibronectin in the extracellular matrix. Very recently, by revealing the mech-anisms of latent TGF-~1 activation from stiff but not from soft ECM, a link has been established between mechanical and chemical factors that regulate myofibroblast differenti-ation. This clearly demonstrates the complex interplay of diffusible and immobilized factors in promot-ing the development of differentiated myofibroblasts. A plethora of other cytokines and/or growth factors have been shown to facilitate or inhibit myofibroblast development and proliferation. Nerve growth factor facilitates the process, however, it is not known whether this action is independent of TG F-~1; interferon-v inhibits the process. The list of factors that modulate myofibroblast dif-ferentiation is constantly growing but it appears that most actions are closely linked to TGF-~1 signaling, which today remains the predominant signaling pathway regulat-ing myofibroblast development. Mechanisms of Force Generation Several observations show that stress fibers are the force-generating elements in wound contraction, since they con-tract upon addition of adenosine trisphosphate to glycer-inated fibroblasts. As well, microinjection experiments revealed that stress fibers are functionally analogous to skeletal muscle fibers. Instrumental for the development of high contractile forces by differentiated myofibroblasts is the nco-expression of a-smooth muscle actin, which leads to a qualitative change in the organiza-tion and function of stress fibers. Over-expression of a-smooth muscle actin enhances the contraction of 3T3 fibroblasts significantly more than the similar over-expres-sion of a-cardiac, {-cytoplasmic, and ~-cytoplasmic actin isoforms. It is presently unclear how a-smooth mus-cle actin can produce this elevated contractile force that appears to be achieved without changes in the expression of other contractile proteins, such as non-muscle or smooth muscle myosins. However, it is specifically inhibited in vitro and in vivo and by the intracellular delivery of a pep-tide corresponding to the a-smooth muscle actin-specific N-terminal amino acid sequence AcEEED. Different models have been developed to study the contractile activity of fibroblastic cells in vitro. Using two-dimensional deformable silicone substrates, fibroblasts have been shown to produce long-lasting wrinkles in the substrate surface, suggesting the production of continuous isometric tension. This technique has been greatly improved over the past decade by developing different elas-tic polymers and mathematical models to calculate cell-generated forces from substrate distortions. In a more tissue-like approach to assess the dynamics of wound con-traction, fibroblasts are cultured in collagen or fibrin matri-ces that are either free-floating and retracting over days or mechanically restrained for days and then stress released, leading to contraction within minutes. Importantly, stress fibers and matrix adhesion (ie, the myofibroblastic phenotype) only develop in mechanically restrained gels. Hence, the choice of the appropriate collagen model facilitates study of the traction forces of migrating fibro-blasts or stress fiber-mediated contraction. Due to the phenotypic and pharmacologic resemblance with smooth muscle, it has been proposed that myofibro-blasts contract in similar fashion. However, experimen-tal and clinical observations show that granulation tissue retraction, in contrast to rapid and reversible contraction of smooth muscle, is the result of a continuous isometric force exerted on the surrounding connective tissue. This retraction is then stabilized by deposition of newly synthe-sized matrix components and thus becomes irreversible. Development of contractile force in the myofibroblast and in smooth muscle is regulated at the level of myosin light chain phosphorylation. Phosphorylated myosin light chain enables the myosin head to interact with actin fila-ments and to generate force. For smooth muscle cells it is generally accepted that increased levels of cytosolic Ca 2+ enhance the activity of the myosin light chain kinase in a Ca 2+/calmodulin-mediated pathway. In this mecha-nism, force development is terminated by continuous action of the myosin light chain phosphatase. In contrast, for fibroblastic cells myosin light chain phosphatase is pro-posed to be the key regulating enzyme. Contraction is achieved by inactivation of the myosin light chain phos-phatase through the Rho- kinase, a downstream target of the small GTPase RhoA. In the currently shared view, changes in cytosolic Ca 2+ regulate smooth muscle cell contraction and RhoA finetunes baseline force development, whereas RhoA activity regulates fibro-blast contraction and sufficiently high cytosolic Ca 2+ levels ensure continued myosin light chain activity. The few studies that have systematically studied myo-fibroblast contraction support either Ca 2+/calmodulin or RhoA as the leading signaling event in regulating myofibro-blast contraction. Experiments with myofibroblast-populated wound granulation tissue strips suggest RhoA as the chief regulator of myofibroblast contractile activity. Inhibition of myosin light chain phosphatase using the phosphatase inhibitor calyculin was shown to be sufficient to induce strip contraction whereas increasing cyto-solic Ca 2+ by membrane depolarization and addition of Ca 2+ ionophore had little effect on myofibroblast contrac-tion of tissue strips and collagen gels. This view of RhoA playing a lead role was further supported by stud-ies using three-dimensional myofibroblast-populated col-lagen gels. Using two-dimensional deformable culture substrates that allow visualization of cell contractile forces, inhibition of Rho was shown to block myofibroblast contraction whereas stimulation with lysophosphatic acid, an upstream effector of Rho, enhanced force development.In contrast, other studies claimed that the level of cyto-solic Ca 2+ is mainly regulating myofibroblast contraction. Application of calmodulin inhibitors to full-thickness rat skin wounds has been shown to impair wound closure, a process that is driven by myofibroblast contraction. Stimulation with a variety of different agonists that all elicit a Ca 2+ response in smooth muscle cells, induce contrac-tion of myofibroblast-populated tissue strips. In three-dimensional collagen gel cultures of rat ventricu-lar and colon myofibroblasts, contraction was substantially regulated by the levels of cytosolic Ca 2+ and interference with Ca 2+-signaling had a more dramatic effect on collagen contraction by myofibroblastic hepatic stel-late cells than modulation of RhoA-dependent processes. Similar induction of myofibroblast contraction was obtained when treating two-dimensional cell cultures with agonists that induce cytosolic calcium transients. In addition to different experimental setups, the heteroge-neous provenance of myofibroblasts is one possible reason for the obvious discrepancy concerning the importance of Ca 2+ and RhoA for myofibroblast contraction. It is conceiv-able that different tissue and cell origins will have an impact on myofibroblast physiology. Another explanation is most intriguing: Instead of rely-ing on either contraction regulation mechanism, myofibro-blasts may use both. This hypothesis has been addressed in a recent study simultaneously assessing local and global contraction events of cultured cardiac myofibroblasts at the single cell level. Contractions of dorsal stress fibers engaged with ECM-coated microbeads were mediated by variations of cytosolic Ca 2+ whereas overall isometric cell tension was maintained through RhoNRho-kinase medi-ated contraction of ventral stress fibers engaged with an elastic rubber substrate. Contractile events following peri-odic cytosolic Ca 2+ increases were acting on a short range and comparably weak as measured by atomic force microscopy. This was in contrast to iso-metric contraction of the rubber substrate over hours with a force development of several /-INper cell or 5 to 10 nN//-lm 2per adhesion site. At the present time, animal experimental or clinical data are not available on how tissue myofibroblast contraction is regulated at the subcellular level. However, the prom-ising in vitro findings have led to the development of an improved "lock-step" model of extracellular matrix remodel-ing. In the model, RhoNRho-kinase signaling is responsible for promoting long-lasting and strong isometric cell contractions, which generate slack in individual colla-gen fibrils. Such tension-released fibrils are then accessible to the weak and short-ranged micro-contractions generated by periodic cytosolic Ca 2+-transients. The gradually rais-ing tension in locally pulled fibrils will increasingly coun-teract further local translocation. At this point, the new fibril configuration has to be stabilized, possibly by local collagen digestion, deposition of new collagen fibrils, and cross-linking with the existent extracellular matrix. The stabilized matrix can then sustain tissue stress and myofi-broblasts are able to re-spread. These processes would result in irreversible retractile rather than reversible contractile phenomena. Mechanisms of Force Transmission The force generated by stress fibers is predominantly trans-mitted to the extracellular matrix at sites of cell-matrix adhesions. In vivo, myofibroblasts form a specialized adhesion complex, the fibronexus, which is charac-terized by a firm co-alignment of intracellular actin fibers with extracellular fibronectin fibrils; these in turn are connected to collagen in the wound matrix. In vitro, differentiated myofibroblasts communicate with the extracellular matrix through specialized "supermature focal adhesions", which have a length of 6 to 30 urn and strongly express the cytoplasmic proteins vinculin, pax-illin, and tens in and the transmembrane integrins av~3 and a5~1. This is in contrast to smaller focal adhesions of a-smooth muscle actin-negative fibroblasts that do not exhibit significant levels of tensin and a5~1 integrin or to fibrillar adhesions that are generally negative for vinculin, paxillin, and av~3 integrin. Focal adhesion supermaturation depends on the high contractile activity developed by a-smooth muscle actin containing stress fibers, analogous to the matu-ration of classical focal adhesions from nascent focal com-plexes in response to up-regulated cell contractile activity. It has been proposed that supermature focal adhe-sions are particularly efficient in promoting tissue contrac-tion by providing high adhesion to the substrate and by immobilizing the cells in the wound bed. Other sites of stress fiber force transmission are cadherin-based adherens junctions that mechanically couple the a-smooth muscle actin-positive stress fibers. It has been proposed that intercellular junc-tions help myofibroblasts to coordinate tension distribution within tissue under mechanical challenge, to propagate intracellular contraction signals and to synchronize myofi-broblast contractile activity. Although cadherins are classically associated with epithelial cell functions, an increasing body of literature has demonstrated their occurrence and importance in connective tissues. In experimental animal models of wound healing and in cul-tured cells, myofibroblasts express a specific repertoire of adherens junction proteins. Notably, expression of cadherin changes from cadherin -2 to cadherin -11 (0B-cadherin) during proto-myofibroblast-to-myofibroblast dif-ferentiation De novo expression of cadherin-l1, similar to that observed in granulation tissue, has been described in stroma fibroblasts reacting against human prostate cancer progression, in fibroblasts surrounding gastric cancer cell nests and suburothelial myofibroblasts in patients with overactive bladders. At the single molecule level, cadherin-ll promotes stronger adhesion than cadherin-2in myofibroblasts and the high intracellular tension generated by a-smooth muscle actin generates larger and more stable adherens junctions. Moreover, inhibition of cadherin-ll but not of cadherin-2 reduces collagen gel contraction by myofibroblasts, suggesting specific implica-tion of cadherin-ll-type adherens junctions in transmitting contractile forces between myofibroblasts. Seminal experiments conducted with cadherin antibody-coated beads that were used to locally subject proto-myofibroblasts to mechanical tension demonstrated that cadherin-2 medi-ates intercellular mechanotransduction by activating Ca 2+-permeable, stretch-sensitive channels. This signaling feature has been further investigated and led to the recent observation that cultured myofibroblasts can utilize mechan-ical adherens junction coupling to communicate between each other. Adherens junction coupling of stress fibers may coordinate tension distribution within the tissue and propagate intracellular mechanical signals, therefore, improving overall connective tissue remodeling.