Bony Sella The pituitary gland is centrally situated at the base of the brain, where it lies safely nestled in the sella turcica, a saddle-shaped concavity within the sphenoid bone (Fig-ures 12.2-12.4). It is attached to the hypothalamus by both the pituitary stalk and a tenuous vascular network -12.7). By virtue of its location, the pituitary gland has many important anatomic relations. Anterior to the Anterior clinoid process Posterior clinoid process Floor of sella turcica Clivus Sphenoid sinus location of the sella turcica and surrounding bony anatomy. Oblique view of the normal skull base; the various skull bones are indicated in color. The sella turcica is centrally located with several foram-ina nearby. The foramen spinosum is not visible in this view. Yellow, sphenoid; pink, occipital; light blue, tem-poral; green, parietal; white, frontal. sella, the sphenoid bone forms a midline slope, the tubercu-lum sella, as well as a transverse indentation, the chiasmal sulcus, so named for the overlying optic chiasm (see Fig-ures 12.3-12.4). The optic canals, which transmit the optic nerves, lie anterolateral to the sulcus, whereas the optic tracts are posterolateral. In view of the pituitary's proximity to the optic apparatus, pituitary lesions that extend superi-orly may cause significant visual field deficits -12.11). Specifically, compression of decussating fibers in the chiasm produces bitemporal hemianopsia, whereas compromise of an optic tract leads to homonymous hemi-anopsia. Further suprasellar extension may cause hypotha-lamic dysfunction and hydrocephalus. The floor of the sella forms a portion of the roof of the sphenoid air sinus, a fortuitous relationship that per-mits ready surgical access. Indeed, the trans sphenoidal approach to the pituitary ini-tially involves mobilization of the nasal septal cartilage fol-lowed by resection of a portion of the ethmoid plate. A sub-labial incision is then made, and the sphenoid speculum is placed in the septal space, permitting direct visualization of the anterior wall of the sphenoid sinus. Upon breaking through the anterior sphenoid wall, the sella may be seen bulging into the roof of the sinus. A septated sphenoid sinus may affect the surgeon's orientation at surgery -12.9). The pituitary is then exposed by traversing the bony sellar floor and incising the dural investment around the gland. The sloping anterior sellar wall terminates in postero-lateral projections, the anterior clinoid processes -12.4). Posterior to the sella, the sphenoid bone con-tinues as the dorsum sellae, anterolateral portions of which form the posterior clinoid processes. Posterior to the dorsum sellae is situated the downward-sloping clivus, notorious as the site of predilection of chordomas. A number of at the level of the pituitary stalk and pituitary gland, showing the pituitary gland with surrounding structures including hypothalamus, third ventricle, optic chiasm, and sphenoid sinus. neurovascular foramina are situated in the sellar region; by name and contents from anterior to posterior, they include the foramen rotundum, ovale (mandibu-lar nerves), spinosum, and lac-erum.cavernous sinuses and forms the sellar diaphragm. The diaphragm is usually thin at the center and thick at its periphery and possesses a variably sized central aperture through which the pituitary stalk passes. Leptomen-inges do encircle the stalk; however, below the level of the sellar diaphragm, they reflect back upon themselves to form a circumferential channel, the infradiaphragmatic hypophysial cistern. This arrangement explains the higher incidence of development of meningiomas in the suprasel-lar surface of the diaphragm rather than in the intrasellar compartment.Meninges The physical relationship of the meninges to the pituitary and sella is unusual in that the pituitary lacks a leptomen-ingeal investment. Periosteal dura lines the sella turcica, whereas the dura proper covers the lateral aspects of the pituitary gland and surrounding structures. The ante-rior and posterior lobes are clearly delineated. The pars tuberalis is the thin tongue-shaped portion of anterior lobe that extends for a short distance up the stalk. This diagram illustrates the proximity of the optic chiasm to the pituitary. Superior extension of a pituitary tumor may compress the optic chiasm with resultant visual field deficits, whereas downward extension mayfill the sphenoid sinus (Luxol-Fast Blue-PAS).\ I, \ \ \ \. "' sen' IIoot' Third ventricle Hypothalamus Optic chiasm Pituitary stalk ~ __ Posterior lobe Anterior lobe &:::=:::=-1i;--~2 -=-.:;;o;r Sphenoid sinus Clivus brain at the level of the pituitary stalk and gland. The clarity of the pitu-itary gland, stalk, hypothalamus, and optic chiasm is remarkable, mak-ing MRI an excellent imaging modality for the assessment of pituitary lesions. One advantage of MRI over computed tomography is the absence of bony artifact with MRI. In some individuals, the leptomeninges exhibit an important anatomic variation. It consists of extension or herniation of the arachnoid through an exceedingly large diaphragmatic opening. A deficiency of the diaphragma sel-lae is assumed to be a prerequisite for the formation of an empty sella. In one study, the incidence of an intrasellar arachnoidocele was found to exceed 20%. In such cases, trans sphenoidal surgery may result in persistent cerebrospi-nal fluid rhinorrhea because of inadvertent violationof the subarachnoid space. With prolonged exertion of even normal CSF pressure, enlargement of such arachnoidoceles may produce sellar enlargement and pituitary compression, the gland being reduced to a thin crescent on the posterior sellar floor. The so-called empty sella may be present in as many as 5.5 %of autopsies and shows a distinct predilection for obese, multiparous females . Compression of the gland and traction deformation of the pituitary stalk may cause mild-to-moderate hypopitu-itarism and hyperprolactinemia, respectively. Vasculature Vascular structures of major surgical Significance abound in the sellar region. The Cavernous Sinuses The paired cavernous sinuses are situated on either side of the sella and, in part, lie lateral and superior to the sphe-noid sinuses. Each cavernous sinus is partially invested by dura of the middle fossa, as well as by thin bony walls of the sphenoid sinus. Venous drainage to the sinuses comes from a number of sources, including the eye, brain (inferior and middle cerebral veins), and sphenoparietal sinus. Communica-tion between right and left cavernous sinuses takes place through intercavernous sinuses bordering the anterior and posterior aspects of the sella. The complex thus forms a venous ring around the sella and its contents. Additional intercavernous sinuses are located along the ventral surface ofthe pituitary stalk and gland. This photograph clearly illustrates the intimate relationships between the cav-ernous sinuses, the sphenoid sinus, and the pituitary gland. Invasive adenomas may extend laterally into one or both cavernous sinuses or inferiorly into the sphe-noid sinus. Note the proximity of the optic chiasm to the pituita ry. pituitary gland and surrounding structures. Note the location of cranial nerves III, IV, VI, and branches of cranial nerve V within the cavernous sinuses, a rela-tionship explaining the occurrence of cranial nerve palsy in association with invasive pituitary adenomas. This section also illustrates the proximity of the inter-nal carotid arteries to the pituitary gland (Luxol-Fast Blue-PAS). of the pituitary. The cavernous sinuses proper contain, in addition to their content of venous sinuses, a number of vital neurovascular structures. These include the cav-ernous segments of the internal carotid arteries and seg-ments of cranial nerves III, IV, V, and VI. Delicate areolar tissue fills the interstices between venous channels, arteries, and nerves. The location of the hori-zontal portions of the internal carotid arteries within the cavernous sinuses varies, not only from person to person but also from left to right. As a result, the carotids may lie immediately adjacent to the sella, in which case they may create a surgical risk. Several branches of the internal carotid artery arise within the cavernous sinus, including the meningohypophysial trunk (the largest Lateral ventricles Third ventricle Region of optic chiasm Pituitary stalk PItuitary gland Cavernous sinus Sphenoid sinus mal skull and brain at the level of the pituitary stalk and gland. The CT scan is a good imaging modality for assessing the pituitary gland; how-ever, radiologists often encounter problems with bony artifact. For this reason, MRI is superior.intracavernous branch), the artery of the inferior cavernous sinus, and McConnell's capsular arteries. Given their location, the cavernous sinuses may be directly involved by pituitary tumors. For example, exten-sion of an invasive adenoma into the cavernous sinuses may produce neuropathies of cranial nerves III through VI (Fig-ure 12.9), including ptosis, facial pain, or diplopia. The Arterial Supply The principal arterial supply of the pituitary originates in two branches of the internal carotids: The superior and inferior hypophysial arteries. A sin-gle superior hypophysial artery springs from each carotid shortly after its entry into the cranial cavity and promptly divides into posterior and anterior branches, each of which anastomoses with the corresponding branch from the oppo-site side to form an arterial ring around the upper pituitary stalk. The anterior branches give rise to trabecular or loral Third ventricle Optic chiasm Pi1uitary stalk Cavernous sinus Pituitary gland carotid arteries pituitary stalk and gland. arteries, which descend on the upper surface of the ante-rior lobe, course toward the pituitary stalk, and terminate in long stalk arteries along the pars tuberalis. In their brief course along the anterior lobe, trabecular arteries each give rise to a small artery of the fibrous core. The posterior and anterior branches of the superior hypophysial arteries are also the source of short stalk arteries, which penetrate the superior aspect of the pituitary stalk to run upward or downward within it. In contrast to the superior hypophysial arteries, the infe-rior branches originate from the meningohypophysial trunkTumor Transsphenoidal approach to the pitu-itary gland. After mobilizing the nasal septal cartilage and resecting a portion of ethmoid plate, a sublabial incision is made, and a sphenoid speculum is placed. Next, the floor of the sphenoid sinus and the floor of the sella turcica are traversed. Finally, the dural invest-ment of the pituitary gland is incised, and the gland is exposed. This diagram illustrates a curette in place for removal of a pituitary adenoma. Clivus within the cavernous sinuses. The meningohypophysial trunk gives rise to several vessels, one of which is the inferior hypophysial artery. They contact the inferolateral portions of the gland and bifurcate into medial and lateral branches that anastomose with their opposite counterparts to form an arterial circle about the posterior lobe. Thus, branches of the inferior hypophysial arteries supply primarily the pos-terior lobe and lower portion of the stalk, contributing only small capsular branches to the periphery of the anterior lobe. Although many of the arterial branches in the pitu-itary stalk and infundibulum form arterioles and capillaries, sellar relationships. The leptomeninges cover the stalk and sellar diaphragm but do not extend into the sella. B. In primary empty sella syndrome, an excessively large diaphragmatic orifice permits herniation of leptomeninges into the sella. Prolonged CSF pressure compresses the gland against the sellar floor. C. Secondary empty sella may result from infarction of a pituitary adenoma, infarction of the pituitary gland, and surgical or radioablation of the gland. (Ar, arachnoid; AP, anterior pituitary; PP, posterior pituitary; C, optic chiasm; 3rd v, third ventricle) dentally encountered primary empty sella. Normally in this view the upper surface of the pituitary gland would be visible through the dia-phragmatic aperture, but here the sella appears empty. Only rarely is primary empty sella syndrome symptomatic. This specimen is from a 57-year-old obese diabetic woman. of the vasculature of the pituitary gland. The superior and inferior hypophysial arteries and branches of the internal carotid arteries comprise the major blood supply of the gland. Small terminal branches of the superior and inferior hypophysial arteries give rise to tangled capillary loops termed gomitoli, which drain into portal vessels. The lat-ter traverse the length of the stalk and terminate as a capillary bed in the anterior lobe. The ante-rior pituitary thus receives the majority of its blood supply not from arteries but from the portal sys-tem. The portal system forms a vital link between the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland.some give rise to unique vascular complexes termed gomi-toli. These "balls of thread" consist of a central artery surrounded by a glomeruloid tangle of capillaries. The transition from central arteries to the capil-laries is via short specialized arterioles endowed with thick smooth muscle sphincters that serve to regulate blood flow. The mixture of periarteriolar capillaries drains into an exten-sive parnpiniform network, the portal system, which enve-lopes the stalk. The Hypophysial Portal System The hypophysial portal system, the critical link between hypothalamus and pituitary, takes its origin from the capil-lary plexus of the median eminence and stalk, which itself is derived from terminal ramifications of the superior and inferior hypophysial arteries. The capillary plexus in the median eminence and superior stalk, the site of uptake ofhypophysiotrophic factors, drains into the long portal vessels that course along the surface of the stalk 'l;"t.Opl~O'-hJ'cto~J''' I Inc SUP. 1'IOp -;----t~~~ilI'br n', cr."' 1t00r19ft 01 '"1. c;"olI<l Il. ) tier cln 10"', Ii".'"ft."~. IIIdJnr _ db~ SIIoH I I Hypo' , 1110-I'I'rClC»ID"yu I , at It'yo' IllroU COte SilO" 011111 11J tlno IIIr Y I)"lI. •.r 01e 'I'IOl11. porUon Ouc'''IJIIIlJ e 011 c"rO'llit Al 01 nl hypo"ll .• pituitary stalk A The complex vascularity of the gomitoli is highlighted by staining with Ulex europeus lectin. B to supply the majority of the anterior lobe, whereas the smaller capillary plexus in the lower stalk gives rise to the short portal vessels that descend into its central portion, including that bordering the posterior lobe. Distally, the portal system communicates with a delicate capillary network in the anterior lobe, which carries hypophysiotro-phic factors into the pituitary and conveys anterior lobe hormones to the general circulation. There-fore, aside from a minor direct arterial supply via capsular branches of the inferior hypophysial arteries, the majority of the anterior lobe's circulation is venous, originating from the portal vessels. In contrast to that of the anterior lin stain. The reticulin stain is invaluable in the evaluation of pituitary adenomas, which are largely devoid of reticulin, whereas the surrounding normal gland retains it. B.The capillary endothelium of the anterior lobe capillary network stains strongly for CD31. llUoI' nd modi IproopHe IltJcl~ua\ M di I 1 fO(DOr41n bllndlo Lm'n lor""n II, Porc.vonulCLllo· hypOP1'1.YI. "',ac\ Supt op CO-h,ypophya r c\ Tuboro -hVpopl'ly, alltract-SUptAoblll1ll .J~nvel.u."'! 1IIl'i Optic norv An'Drlo. plUm ryDo.c'.ncf"'~ -hYPOlh','.ml0 COMoclfo". Pone RoUeu'lIrlorm.tlon Inlo,mocl to loboZono 0"buop ,'n k)n pophysial and paraventriculohypophysial tracts, as well as the tuberohypophysial tract. The former carry vasopressin and oxytocin along axons to the posterior lobe, whereas the latter carries hypothalamic releas-ing and inhibiting hormones to the median eminence, where they enter the portal system for transport to the anterior lobe. lobe, the blood supply of the posterior lobe is direct and arterial, a characteristic that explains the predilection of metastatic carcinomas for the neural lobe. Venous outflow of the pituitary is via collecting vessels that drain into the subhypophysial sinus, cavernous sinus, and superior circular sinus.