Muscle biopsies should be performed by physicians with expertise in biopsy technique and a sincere interest in obtaining the best possible specimen. The physician who has direct responsibility for the patient's care needs to be sure that the biopsy comes from an appropriate muscle so that it is representative of the disease process. In some con-ditions, the disease process is widespread, such as in many metabolic diseases, and virtually any muscle is suitable for biopsy. However, in other disorders where, for example, symptoms are referable to the legs and spare the arms, a biopsy of the deltoid or biceps brachii muscle is unlikely to reflect the disease process accurately and may be nor-mal or nondiagnostic. Moreover, whenever possible, the tis-sue sample should be obtained from a region in which the disease process remains active rather than quiescent. In a muscle where the disease process has subsided, the biopsy is apt to be unremarkable. In severely involved muscle, par-ticularly if there is marked weakness or wasting, the patho-logic findings are likely to be those of end-stage disease that may defy conclusive pathologic interpretation. Mus-cles subjected to previous traumatic injury, such as needle tracts incurred during EMG or intramuscular injections of medications, and muscles altered by an unrelated disease process should not be biopsied. The pathologic picture in such muscles may simulate that associated with a variety of neuromuscular diseases and will confuse the pathologist. The special handling of the muscle biopsy precludes submission of the specimen on weekends and holidays or late in the workday afternoon when laboratory person-nel are not available to receive and process the tissue. If possible, a technician familiar with the biopsy technique should assist the physician performing the biopsy and col-lect the specimen properly. Two separate specimens from the same site are routinely required. The first specimen is maintained at isometric length by its insertion in a mus-cle clamp. This device is designed to minimize contrac-tion artifact, which inevitably results when an incision is made in the muscle, and it is immersed in fixative. Since the muscle is introduced into the instrument lengthwise, the sample is conveniently oriented for further processing. The biopsy must extend entirely across the clamp, thereby ensuring an acceptable specimen size of at least 1ernin length. The biopsy should be of sufficient size to maximize the opportunity of observing the entire pathologic process. To attain this goal, some clinicians favor obtaining two biopsies routinely, one from the arm and one from the leg, for example. Thus, the major drawback to needle biopsy, which has certain advantages over open biopsy, is the lim-ited size of the sample. Although there is some disagreement regarding the pri-mary fixative for muscle biopsies, we have elected to use 10% formalin, buffered to a pH of 7.4 in a 0.1 M phos-phate buffer. Strips of muscle 1 mm in width are dissected from the edges of the sample and postfixed in phosphate-buffered 2% glutaraldehyde for electron microscopic study. After fixation for a minimum of 24 hours in 10% phosphate-buffered formalin, the remainder of the sampled speci-men is used for routine paraffin sections. A second unfixed specimen measuring 1 X0.5 X0.5 em is obtained for the preparation of frozen sections. Although the utilization of a muscle clamp is not mandatory, clamping the specimen will help in its orientation. Several techniques are described for flash freezing, but we prefer freezing the sample in liquid nitrogen after coating the surface of the specimen with talc. Whatever technique is employed, the condition on which the freezing technique is based is that it proceeds with extreme rapid-ity, within 10 to 15 seconds. Freezing the tissue in a cryo-stat in a fashion similar to most specimens submitted for frozen section diagnosis from the operating room is con-traindicated. The frozen sample should be oriented so that cross sections of muscle are cut. Serial frozen sections in our laboratory are stained with H&E, Gomori's RTC, and three standard histochemical reactions: ATPase (pH 9.4 and 4.6) and NADH-TR. Other stains such as PAS for gly-cogen, phosphorylase, and fat stains are performed when indicated. Frozen tissue may also be used for biochemical analysis, for immunohistochemical preparations, and for immunofluorescence microscopy. Inasmuch as frozen tis-sue may be needed for future additional studies, muscle biopsies can be sealed in airtight plastic capsules or bags to prevent dessication and freezing artifact while stored in an ultralow freezer at -70°C.REFERENCES 1. Gilbert SF. Development Biology. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer; 2010. 2. Sadler TW. Medical Embryology. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; 2010. 3. Carlson BM. Human Embryology and Developmental Biology. Philadelphia, PA: Mosby; 2005. 4. Messina G, Biressi S, Monteverde S, et al. Nfix regulates fetal-specific transcription in developing skeletal muscle. Cell 2010;4:554-566. 5. Adhihetty PJ, Hood DA. Mechanisms of apoptosis in skeletal muscle. Basic Appl Myol 2003;13:171-179. 6. O'Flaherty J, Mei Y, Freer M, et al. Signaling through the TRAIL receptor DRS/FADD pathway plays a role in the apoptosis associated with skeletal muscle myoblast differen-tiation. Apoptosis 2006; 11:2103-2113. 7. Dubowitz V,Brooke MH. Muscle Biopsy. A Modern Approach. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1973. 8. Heffner RR Jr, Balos LL. Muscle biopsy in neuromuscular dis-eases. In: Mills SE, ed. Sternberg's Diagnostic Surgical Pathol-ogy; Vol. 1. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2010:99-213. 9. Dubowitz V,Sewry CA. Muscle Biopsy. A Modern Approach. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier; 2007. 10. Bennington JL, Krupp M. Morphometric analysis of mus-cle. In: Heffner RR, ed. Muscle Pathology. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 1984:43-71. 11. Brooke MH, Kaiser KK. Muscle fiber types: how many and what kind? Arch Neurol1970;23:369-379. 12. Carnac C, Vernus B, BonnieuA. Myostatin in the pathophys-iology of skeletal muscle. Curr Genomics 2007;8:415-422. 13. Bossen EH. Collection and preparation of the muscle biopsy. In: Heffner RR, ed. Muscle Pathology. Vol 3. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 1984:11-14. 