Dermis The dermal component of the nail structures is a very spe-cialized tissue, unique in that it is limited by the underly-ing phalanx and closely associated with its vasculature and nerve supply. There is no subcutaneous tissue, as previously noted. Dermis, epithelium, and nail plate in the nail bed pres-ent special histologic features due to the great traction that is supported. The dermis is very thick with a dense colla-gen layer. These fibers are vertically situated in the proximal zone of the nail bed and inclined at 45 degrees in the zone adjacent to the hyponychium. Collagen- IV immunostains demonstrate an intense positive in this area. Their mission is to attach the nail plate directly with the phalangeal periosteum. Conversely, the nail plate and the nail bed are quite firmly attached to each other, more so than the nail plate to the matrix, and this seems to be accomplished by the striking, deep longitudinal ridges and furrows of the nail surface of the nail plate. The nail bed has a unique, longitudinal, tongue-and-groove spatial arrangement of papillary dermal papillae Collagen fibers of the proximal nail bed. Observe the peculiar vertical disposition. and epidermal rete ridges. This feature is easily observed in transverse sections, in which this arrangement is appreci-ated as a serrated interdigitation of the ventral surface of the nail, papillae, and rete. These furrows can be seen very well macroscopically just after avulsion of the nail plate, but they are also beautifully shown microscopically by optical microscope. There are few studies about the nerve supply of the nail. The matrix and nail bed present sparse nerve endings liar inclined disposition. and few Vater-Pacini and Meissner corpuscles. Intraepithelial nerve fibers were described at the beginning of this century, but other authors were unable to confirm the description. Experimental studies have established that for digit-tip regrowth, the major nerve sup-ply is not needed but the nail organ is needed. Nail organ of regrowing fetal digit-tips has been shown to produce Msx, a transcription factor associated with limb bud outgrowth. In the same way, it is plausible that nail bed epithe-lium, acting like an inductive wound epithelium in newts, provides growth factors in mammals that can substitute for those generated by nerve in newt limbs. The hyponychium is the area with greater abundance of nerve endings of the nail, and with abundant Meissner and Merkel-Ranvier corpuscles, as in the lateral nail folds lower surface of the nail plate This histologic feature gives the hyponychium an important role in the fine sensibility of the finger. Bone The nail apparatus includes the subjacent bone. Although the bone has been ignored during the last years, a recent study of postamputational repair following digit-tip ampu-tation revealed an unexpected correlation between nail regrowth and bone regrowth. In this way, Zhao and Neufeld have studied this relationship, observing that in the absence of nail, bone did not regrow at distal levels, and conversely, when the nail was surgically retained, bone regrew from proximal levels. bed epithelium attached to the lower surface of the nail plate. Blood Supply The nail has a rich vascularization that deserves separate mention. The arterial blood supply of the nail bed and matrix is derived from paired digital arteries. The most important studies have been published by Flint in 1955, Ryan in 1973, and Smith et al. in 1991 concluding that the main supply passes into the pulp space of the distal pha-lanx before reaching the dorsum of the digit. An accessory supply arises further back on the digit and does not enter the pulp space. The digital arterial system manifests three characteristic anatomic features: Arched anastomotic arter-ies in the deep dermis; more superficial terminal arteries branching to supply the rete, and the great tortuosity of the arterial architecture subjacent to the nail apparatus. The arteries possess inner longitudinal and outer circular coats of smooth muscle. Oxy-gen-sensitive microelectrodes (tip diameter -5urn] to mea-sure the distribution of p02 in dermal papillae of the finger nail folds of healthy human subjects have been developed by Wang et al The vasculature in the nail bed is unique in that it must supply a vascular structure between two hard surfaces, the nail plate and the bone. Studies with scanning electron microscopy revealed special vascular patterns of nail micro-circulation. In the eponychium and perionychium, the vascular villi followed the direction of nail growth. In the face of the eponychium in contact with the nail, a wide-mesh net of capillaries was evident. In the nail bed, the ves-sels were arranged in many longitudinal trabeculae parallel to the major axis of the digit. In the root of the nail, many columnar vessels characterized by multiple angiogenic but-tons on their surface may be observed. The venous drainage is achieved by two veins, one on each side of the nail plate, in the proximal nail folds. The capillary network is easily seen in the proximal nail fold with a magnifying lens, and is seen in more detail with an cular supply, with numerous vertical arteries; branches of the arched arteries ofthe deep dermis. Detail of the rich vascular supply of the nail bed (reticulin stain). ophthalmoscopic or capillary microscope. It is essentially the same as the network of the skin but the capillary loops are more horizontal and visible throughout their length. Certain diseases can modify its normal structure and a sim-ple clinical examination or by widefield nail fold microscopy can be very useful as an aid in diagnosis.