The size of the breast is greatly influenced by the individ-ual's body habitus because the breast is a major repository for fat; it can range in size from 30 g to more than 1000 g. The breast lies on the anterior chest wall over the pectora-lis major muscle and typically extends from the second to the sixth rib in the vertical axis and from the sternal edge to the midaxillary line in the horizontal axis. Breast tissue also projects into the axilla as the tail of Spence. The breast extends laterally over the serratus anterior muscle and infe-riorly over the external oblique muscle and the superior rec-tus sheath. The breast lies within a space in the superficial fascia, which is continuous with the cervical fascia superi-orly and the superficial abdominal fascia of Cooper inferi-orly. The only boundary of the breast that is anatomicallywell-defined is the deep surface where it abuts the pectora-lis fascia. However, despite this macroscopic demarcation, microscopic foci of glandular tissue may extend into and even through the pectoral fascia and may traverse the other anatomic boundaries described earlier. The clinical signifi-cance of this observation is that even total mastectomy does not result in removal of all glandular breast tissue. Bundles of dense fibrous connective tissue, the suspensory liga-ments of Cooper, extend from the skin to the pectoral fascia and provide support to the breast. The adult female breast consists of a series of ducts, ductules, and lobular acinar units embedded within a stroma that is composed of varying amounts of fibrous and adipose tissue. The stroma comprises the major portion of the nonlactating adult breast, and the relative proportions of fibrous tissue and adipose tissue vary with age and among individuals. amounts of collagen and adipose tissue. A. Low-power view of breast with dense, fibrotic stroma. B. Low-power view of breast with predominantly fatty stroma. material into an orifice of a lactiferous duct at the nipple. A ductogram demonstrates the complex ramifications of a single mammary ductal system. The ductal-lobular system of the breast is arranged in the form of segments or lobes. Although these segments can be readily appreciated by injecting the ductal system with dyes or radiologic contrast agents, they are ana-tomically poorly defined, and no obvious boundaries can be appreciated between these segments during surgery, upon gross inspection of mastectomy specimens, or on histologic examination. In addition, these segments show considerable individual variation with regard to their extent and distribu-tion, and the ramifications of individual segments may overlap. The segmental nature of some neoplastic processes in the breast, particularly ductal carcinoma in situ, is now widely appreciated. This recognition, in conjunction with observations in developmental anatomy and morphology, has led to the development of the "sick lobe" hypothesis of breast cancer. This theory postulates that early breast car-cinoma is a lobar disease, often isolated to a single ductal system. Thus, surgical resection of the involved lobe or segment is an important therapeutic goal. Unfortunately, because it is not possible for the surgeon to define intraoperatively the boundaries of the involved segment, performing a "segmentectomy" to remove the entirety of a diseased segment is at this time more of a theoretical concept than a practically attainable goal. Each segment consists of a branching structure that has been likened to a flowering tree. The Microanatomy of normal adult female breast tissue showing extralobular ducts, terminal ducts, and lobules, the latter composed of groups of small glandular structures, the acini. lobules represent the flowers, draining into ductules and ducts, which, in turn, drain into the collecting ducts that open onto the surface of the nipple. Just below the nipple, the ducts are expanded to form lactiferous sinuses. The sinuses terminate in cone-shaped ampullae just below the surface of the nipple. The actual number of segments in the breast, as well as their relationship to each other, has long been a matter of debate. Most textbooks indicate that there are 15 to 20 ductal orifices on the nipple surface and suggest that this corresponds to the number of ductal systems, segments, or lobes in the breast. In contrast, a number of mammary duct injection studies have suggested that there are only between 5 and 15 discrete breast ductal systems or segments in each breast. The discrepancy between the number of ductal orifices on the nipple and the actual num-ber of breast segments or ductal systems may be explained by the fact that some of the orifices on the nipple represent openings of sebaceous glands or other nonductal tubular structures that do not contribute to the ductal-lobular anat-omy of the breast. Another possibility is that some lactifer-ous ducts bifurcate immediately before entering the nipple or end blindly. The issue of anastomoses between ductal systems is also unresolved. One study indicated that although ductal systems may lie near one another and even intertwine within a particular quadrant, they do not inter-connect. However, anastomoses between ductal sys-tems have been reported by others. The epithelium throughout the ductal-lobular system is bilayered, consisting of an inner epithelial cell layer and an outer myoepithelial cell layer. The importance of this double cell layer cannot be overempha-sized because it is one of the main guides used to distin-guish benign from malignant lesions. The luminal epithelial cells of the resting breast ducts and lobules are cuboidal to columnar and typically have pale eosinophilic layer, and an outer layer of myoepithelial cells. A.High-power view of a lobule. The myoepithelial cells surrounding the acinar epithelial cells are variably conspicuous. B.High-power view of an extralobular duct, showing distinct epithelial and myoepithelial cell layers. cytoplasm and relatively uniform oval nuclei. These epithe-lial cells express a variety of low-molecular-weight cytokera-tins, including cytokeratins 7, 8, 18, and 19. The outer cell layer, although always present, is variably distinctive. Myoepithelial cells range in appearance from barely discernible, flattened cells with compressed nuclei to prominent epithelioid cells with abundant clear cytoplasm. In some cases, the myoepi-thelial cells have a myoid appearance featuring a spindle cell shape and dense, eosinophilic cytoplasm, reminiscent of smooth muscle cells. Even when inconspicuous on hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections, myoepithelial cells can readily be demonstrated using immunohistochem-ical stains for a variety of markers, including S-100 pro-tein, actins, calponin, smooth muscle myosin heavy chain, p63, CD 10, and p75 among others. However, these markers vary in both sensitivity and specific-ity for myoepithelium as well as in their expression by loca-tion within the terminal duct lobular unit. Myoepi-thelial cells express high-molecular-weight cytokeratins 5/6, 14, and 17, but the expression of cytokeratin 14 is restricted to the myoepithelial cells of the large ducts and terminal ducts; expression is not seen in myoepithelial cells of the intralobular ductules and acini. A third cell type dispersed irregularly throughout the ductal-lobular system expresses high-molecular-weight cytokeratins 5 and 14 in the absence of expression of mark-ers of differentiated luminal epithelial cells (such as low-molecular-weight cytokeratins) or myoepithelial cells (such as smooth muscle actin). These cells have been postulated to represent progenitor cells capable of differentiating into both luminal epithelial cells and myoepithelial cells. The relationship of these putative "progenitor" cells to mam-mary stem cells is at this time an unresolved issue. show prominent cytoplasmic clearing. B.In this lobule, the myoepithelial cells show myoid features. However, it is now clear that cells with the characteristic features of stem cells (ie, self-renewal and the ability to differentiate into different cell lineages to form all of the cell types found in the mature tissue) do exist in the breast. Mammary stem cells appear to be important in both breast development and mammary carcinogenesis. Phenotypic features that have been associated with the mammary stem cell population include lack of expression of estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor, high expression of CD44, low or absent expression of CD24, and expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase, although the most accurate combination of markers to reli-ably identify mammary stem cells is unresolved at this time. A basal lamina consisting of type IV collagen and lam-inin surrounds the mammary ducts, ductules, and acini. This basal lamina is present outside of the myoepi-thelial cell layer and serves to demarcate the breast ductal-lobular system from the surrounding stroma. Extralobular ductand lobuleimmunostained for p63. The myoepithelial cells show strong nuclear reactivity, whereas the epithelial cell nuclei show negative reactivity. C.Double immunostain for smooth muscle actin and p63 (brown nuclear staining) highlights the myoepithelial cells around this mammary duct. Note the lack of staining of the epithelial cells for both p63 and smooth muscle actin. lamina around the acini of a lobule. :::~r8r »-:' terminal duct Extralobular terminal duct Epithelial hyperplasia and most carcinomas A schematic representation of the breast indicating the sites of origin of pathologic lesions. IReprinted from Schnitt SJ, Millis RR, Hanby AM, et al. The breast. Mills SE, Carter 0,Greeson JK, Oberman HA, Reuter VE, Stoler MH, eds. Sternberg's Diagnostic Surgical Pathology. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &Wilkins; 2004:323-398.) Paget's disease Nipple adenoma -"--1E~==~~ Duct ectasia Most si'lgle solitary papillomasFibroadenomas, cysts and adenosis Beyond the basal lamina, the extralobular ducts exhibit a zone of fibroblasts and capillaries. Elastic tissue is normally present in variable amounts around ducts and is generally more prominent in older than in younger women. Elastic fibers are not typically seen around the terminal ducts or acini. The lobule, together with its terminal duct, has been called the TDLU. This represents the structural and func-tional unit of the breast. During lactation, epithelial cells in both the terminal duct and lobule undergo secretory changes. Thus, the terminal ducts are responsible for both secretion and transport of the secretions to the extralobu-lar portion of the ductal system. Subgross anatomic studies have shown that most lesions originally termed "ductal" (eg, cysts, ductal epithelial hyperplasia, and ductal carcinoma in situ) actually arise from the TDLU, which "unfolds" with coalescence of the acini to produce larger structures resembling ducts. The majority of patho-logic changes in the breast, including in situ and invasiveTOLU carcinomas, are generally considered to arise from the TDLU. Indeed, the only common lesion thought to arise from the large- or medium-sized duct rather than from the TDLU is the solitary intraductal papilloma. The normal lobule consists of a variable number of blind-ending terminal ductules, also called acini, each with its typical double cell layer. The lobular acini are invested by a loose, fibrovascular intralobular stroma with varying numbers of lymphocytes, plasma cells, macrophages, and mast cells. This specialized intralobular stroma is sharply demarcated from the surrounding denser, more highly col-lagenized, paucicellular, interlobular stroma and stromal adipose tissue. One feature of note that is sometimes encountered in the extralobular stroma is the presence of multinucleated giant cells. Their signifi-cance is unknown; and although they may present a dis-turbing appearance, they should not be mistaken for the malignant cells of an invasive carcinoma. intralobular stroma. The extralobularstroma is composed primarily of dense collagen with admixed adipose tissue. B. Higher-power view contrasts loose intralobular stroma with more collagenized interlobular stroma. scattered in the stroma. B.High-power view illustrates cytologic detail. These cells have a mesenchymal phenotype. Despite their worrisome histologic appearance, they have no known clinical significance. The size of mammary lobules and the number of acini per lobule are extremely variable. Russo et al. have described four lobule types. Type 1 lobules are the most rudimentary and are most prevalent in prepubertal and nul-liparous women, comprising 65 to 80% of the lobules in this group. These lobules are composed pri-marily of ducts with sprouting alveolar buds. Type 1 lob-ules gradually evolve to more mature structures (type 2 and type 3 lobules) through the development of additional alveolar buds. The number of alveolar buds per lobule increases from approximately 11 in type 1 lobules to 47 and 80 in type 2 and 3 lobules, respectively. In the par-ous, premenopausal woman, type 3 lobules are most preva-lent, comprising 70 to 90% of the lobular elements. Type 4 lobules are those seen during pregnancy and lactation. Of interest, Russo et al. have reported that type 1lobules predominate in the breasts of women with breast cancer, regardless of pregnancy history. They have also provided experimental evidence suggesting that type 1and 2 lobules are more susceptible to malignant transformation than are type 3 lobules upon exposure to chemical carcinogens. However, more recent data indicate that women with pre-dominantly type 1 lobules or lobules that have undergone involution have a reduced risk of subsequent breast cancer compared with women with predominantly type 3 lobules or lobules that have not undergone involution. It should be noted, though, that type 1, 2, and 3 lobules com-monly coexist in the same breast and that the utility of dis-tinguishing among them in clinical practice remains to be defined. The lobules exhibit morphologic changes during the menstrual cycle, and these are seen in both the epithe-lial and stromal components. These changes are summarized in Table 3.2. Although the changes that occurduring the menstrual cycle are variable among lobules in the same breast, even among immediately adjacent lobules, a dominant morphologic pattern is typically present in each phase. However, these menstrual cycle-related changes are subtle when compared with the dramatic alterations seen during pregnancy and lactation and when compared with the menstrual cycle-related changes seen in the endometrium. Occasionally, the TDLU epithelial cells show prominent clear cell change in the cytoplasm. This may be seen in both premenopausal and postmenopausal women and appears to be unrelated to pregnancy or exogenous hormone use. The nipple-areola complex is a circular area of skin that exhibits increased pigmentation and contains numerous sensory nerve endings. The nipple is placed centrally and is elevated above the surrounding areola. The tip of the nipple contains 15 to 20orifices. However, as discussed earlier, the number of such openings may not correlate directly with the number of breast segments. In the nonlactating breast, these duct openings typically possess keratin plugs. The areola surface exhibits numerous small, rounded elevations, the Montgomery tubercles. Both the nipple and areola are covered by keratinizing, stratified squamous epithelium, and this extends for a short distance into the terminal portions of the lactiferous ducts. The epidermis of the nipple-areola complex may contain occasional clear cells that are cytologically benign and that must not be confused with Paget cells. Some of these cells represent clear keratinocytes, whereas others are thought to be derived from epidermally located mammary ductal epithelium. The proximal ramifications of the mammary ductal sys-tem that are present in the dermis of the nipple typically have a pleated or serrated contour. These Menstrual Cycle Phase Epithelium Acinar Lumina Intralobular Stroma Dense, cellular with plump fibroblastsEarly follicular Cells: single cell type apparent (small, polygonal cells with pale eosinophilic cytoplasm); myoepithelial cells inconspicuous Orientation: poor Secretion: none Mitoses/apoptosis: rareLargely closed and inapparent Late follicular Well defined Less cellular and more collagenized than in early luteal phaseCells:three cell types, including luminal basophilic cells, intermediate pale cells, and myoepithelial cells with clear cytoplasm Orientation: radial around lumen Secretion: none Mitoses/apoptosis: rare Early luteal Loose Cells:three cell types, including luminal basophilic cells with minimal apical snouting, intermediate pale cells, and myoepithelial cells with prominent cytoplasmic vacuolization and ballooning Orientation: radial around lumen Secretion: slight Mitoses/apoptosis: rareOpen, enlarged compared with follicular phase, with slight secretion Late luteal Open, with secretion Loose, edematous, congested blood vesselsCells:three cell types, including luminal basophilic cells with prominent apical snouting, intermediate pale cells, and myoepithelial cells with prominent cytoplasmic vacuolization Orientation: radial around lumen Secretion: active apocrine secretion from luminal cells Mitoses/apoptosis:frequent Menstrual Dense, cellular Cells:two cell types, including luminal basophilic cells with scant cytoplasm and less apical snouting than in late luteal phase, and myoepithelial cells with extensive cytoplasmic vacuolization Orientation: radial around lumen Secretion: resorbing Mitoses/apoptosis: rareDistended with secretion Adapted from McCarty KS, Nath M. Breast. In: Sternberg SS, ed. Histology for Pathologists. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven; 1997:71-82. is extreme, with formation of large intracytoplasmic vacuoles. These cells should not be mistaken for the cells of Paget's disease. Cross section through the nipple. The irregular, pleated, or serrated contour of the nipple ducts is evident. prominent bundles of smooth muscle fibers. ducts are surrounded by a stroma rich in circular and longitudinal smooth muscle bundles, collagen, and elastic fibers. Occasionally, lobules may be seen in the nipple. Simple mammary ducts are also present throughout the dermis of the areola, even at its periphery, and these may extend to within less than Imm of the basal layer of the epidermis. While the nipple-areola complex lacks pilosebaceous units and hairs except at the periphery of the areola, the dermis contains numerous sebaceous glands. Some of these glands open directly onto the surface of the nipple and are-ola, whereas others drain into a lactiferous duct or share a common ostium with a lactiferous duct. The tubercles of Montgomery represent a unit consisting of a sebaceous apparatus and an associated lactiferous duct . During pregnancy, these tubercles become increas-ingly prominent. Apocrine sweat glands may also be seen in the dermis of the nipple and areola. Another finding that may occasionally be encountered within the breast parenchyma is the presence of intrama-mmary lymph nodes. These lymph nodes may be identified as an incidental finding in breast tissue removed because of another abnormality, or they may be seen as den-sities on mammograms.