More than one million axons from the retinal nerve fiber layer converge at the optic nerve head, which accounts for the physiologic blind spot in the normal visual field and represents the beginning of the optic nerve. The central retinal artery and vein traverse the optic nerve and within a slight depression at the origin of the nerve, they are sur-rounded by glial tissue. From the optic nerve head, the axons extend for approximately 1 mm to a sieve-like partition of connective tissue in the sclera (the lamina cribrosa) through which the nerve fibers pass on their way to the brain. Over one thousand nerve fiber bundles sur-rounded by astrocytes, oligodendroglia, and collagenous septae can be identified in cross sections of the optic nerve, which is a tract of the central nervous system. Like the brain, the optic nerve is surrounded by dura, arachnoid, and pia mater. Small focal meningothelial proliferations occasionally form within the leptomeninges surrounding the optic nerve. Some orbital meningiomas pole of the eye. This histologic section contains the central retinal artery in the central part of the optic nerve. Both the central retinal artery and the central retinal vein traverse the optic nerve until they exit the nerve about 8 to 15mm posterior to the eyeball. Nerve fiber bundles within the optic nerve are sur-rounded by thin collagenous septae. presumably arise from them. Laminated products of the meningothelial cells sometimes occur in the arachnoid mater. Pigmented melano-cytes are sometimes encountered within the leptomeninges and the optic nerve head. After leaving the globe, each optic nerve continues pos-teriorly through the orbit to its respective optic foramen, and then to the optic chiasm, before terminating in the lat-eral geniculate bodies. At the level of the lamina cribrosa, the axons within the optic nerve become myelinated by concentric membranous processes of the oligodendroglia. The rather abrupt transition between myelinated and nonmyelinated nerve fibers is emi-nently appreciated in tissue sections stained with luxol fast blue or other dyes with an affinity for myelin. As the axons acquire myelin coats, the diameter of the optic nerve doubles to nearly 3 mm. Located within the central core of the optic nerve, adjacent to the globe, is the central reti-nal artery and vein. Both of these vascular channels exit the often closely associated with the meningothelial cells of the optic nerve. and myelinated nerve fibers of the normal optic nerve at the level of the lamina cribrosa is dramatically illus-trated in this tissue section stained with a dye that has an affinity for myelin nerve some 8 to 15 mm posterior to the lamina cribrosa; the channels are not evident within tissue sections of the optic nerve closer to the brain. The orbital portion of the optic nerve extends some 25 mm from the lamina cribrosa to the optic foramen at the apex of the orbit. If the optic nerve becomes compressed during enucleation of the globe, some optic nerve tissue may extrude into the eye and become dislodged into the lumen of blood vessels near the optic discs, between the sen-sory retina and the retinal pigment epithelium, and even into The crystalline lens is situated just posterior to the pupil and iris. the vitreous. Neural tissue within the optic nerve may become displaced, in a manner comparable to the "toothpaste" arti-fact of the spinal cord that follows a traumatic insinuation of white matter into the gray matter. This artifact should not be mistaken for ectopic intraocular nervous tissue, tumors, giant drusen, vitreous worms, or subretinal exudates. With age, corpora amylacea, similar to those in the retina and brain, may become evident in the optic nerve.