Brown Fat Lesions Hibernoma The only pathologic lesion of brown fat known to date is the hibernoma, the neoplastic counterpart given its name by Gery. Although many of the cells in the hibernoma are multivacuolated, some cells lack vacuoles completely and are eosinophilic and granular in appearance. Both of these cell types have a centrally placed nucleus. Importantly, uni-vacuolated cells with peripherally placed nuclei resembling white adipocytes can be identified, as they can in normal brown fat. The red-brown color of a hibernoma is the result of the increased vascularity in numerous mitochondria. The ultrastructure of hibernoma is similar to brown fat; and, indeed, when cellular organelles are compared, the ultrastructure suggested to a number of authors is that brown fat and white fat are two distinct tissues, with different ultrastructural features. Concerning location, many hibernomas arise in sites corresponding to the distribution of normal brown fat-interscapular area, neck, mediastinum, and axilla; other cases have been reported in the abdominal wall, thigh, and popliteal space, all sites considered devoid of brown fat. Generally, medium-sized tumors, hibernomas may obtain a huge dimension [23 em] and are often present for years prior to exci-sion. The tumors typically occur in young adults with a median age of 26 years, much younger than patients with ordinary lipoma. Interestingly, endocrine activity has been noted within these tumors, with steroid hormones detected. Hiber-nomas do not recur, but whether malignant hibernomas exist has been a controversial topic. A case having atypical mitoses and bizarre nuclei was reported by Enterline et al and a similar case with ultrastructural features was documented by Teplitz et al Recently, CD31 has been found immunohistochemically in hibernomas. White Fat Lesions Adipose Tissue within Nonfatty Lesions Almost any malignant tumor may invade and incorporate mature fat cells. Occasionally, however, the presence of fat cells within mesenchymal proliferation can be confusing. For example, nodular fasciitis may incorporate individual fat cells that can appear smaller than normal, mimicking lipo-blasts. Likewise, a very prominent component of adi-pose tissue accompanies intramuscular hemangiomas, angi-omatosis, and lymphangiomatosis of the extremities. Benign teratomas of the ovary and lung occasionally contain mature adipose tissue as an inciden-tal finding. So-called fibrous polyps of the esophagus also contain adipose tissue. Other nonlipomatous tumors that may contain fat include the pleomorphic adenoma of the salivary gland and the benign spindle cell breast tumor described by Toker et al This lesion may be what has been described recently as a myofibroblastoma with the incorporation of adipose tissue. Even fibro-matosis may have an extensive admixture of benign adipose tissue. Perhaps by a process of cellular metaplasia, fat may also be found occasionally in the endometrium or in epi-thelial tumors of various types. Ectopic Adipose Tissue Ectopic fat either in cardiac valves or within organs was discussed earlier in the Metaplasia and Fatty Infiltration sections. Oddly enough, ectopic fat may occur in the der-mis, where it causes a pedunculated appearance; this has been termed nevus lipomatosis superficialis or, more recently, pedunculated lipofibroma. Hamartomas Containing Fat Cells Many of us are aware that the benign pulmonary "chon-droma," or "hamartoma," may contain fat. In fact, approximately 75% of these lesions do, and the pres-ence of such a tissue foreign to the lung parenchyma supports the concept that these lesions are benign mesenchymomas. Occasionally, the lipomatous component may be so dominant as to suggest a lipoma. Amazingly, adipose tissue can be a component of many other unusual lesions. It may be coupled with vascular, fibrous, and myofibroblastic components in multiple con-genital mesenchymal hamartomas [multiple sites]; with undifferentiated spindle cells and fibroblasts in the fibrous hamartoma of infancy [mainly in shoulder and axil-lary regions]; with fibrous tissue and mature nerve in the sometimes congenital fibrolipomatous hamar-toma of nerve with or without macrodactyly [palm, wrist, or fingers]; or with smooth muscle and vessels in the angiomyolipoma. These hamartomatous lesions of tuberous sclerosis will be discussed further. In another oddity, adipose tissue is one component of human tails and pseudotails, along with skin and other tissues. Massive Localized Lymphedema In morbidly obese patients, huge subcutaneous masses as large as 50 ernmay form, clinically mimicking liposarcoma. Pedunculated masses of adipose tissue show dilated lymphatics and edema and thus this condition is known as massive localized lymphedema. Grossly, the fat is marbled in appearance secondary to coarse bands of fibrous tissue intersecting fat lobules. Microscopically, the adipose tissue is dissected by fibrosis simulating sclerosing liposar-coma; however, the lesion is superficial, and neither there are atypical stromal cells nor lipoblasts. In the edematous septa, scattered myofibroblasts are noted. Aside from the often post-surgical abdominal sites reported initially, massive localized lymphedema may also occur in the thigh, scrotum, and ingui-nal regions and be associated with hypothyroidism. Mesenchymomas Adipose tissue is a nearly constant component of what had been called "benign mesenchymomas," a term that has fallen out of favor. These growths should now be designated according to the primary component. In the past, LeBer and Stout required the presence of at least two different mesenchymal elements to make a diagnosis of mesenchy-moma. However, we believe that the trend has evolved in favor of diagnosing lesions with only two elements as chon-drolipoma, fibrolipoma, and so on. This seems appropriate since the secondary element, usually in a lipoma, is frequently a very focal finding (as it may be in a liposar-coma). Lesions with three or more elements have been des-ignated true mesenchymomas. For instance, a description of a trigeminal neurilemmoma was really a mesenchy-moma with cartilage, bone, hemangioma, schwannoma, and adipose tissue. Also, a thoracic tumor with smooth muscle, angiomatoid spaces, fibrous tissue, and adipose tissue is another mesenchymoma, reported in association with hemi-hypertrophy. Angiomyolipoma could be considered an example of a "mesenchymoma" and is frequently found in the kidney, where approximately 40% are associated with tuber-ous sclerosis. Although the fat seen here is practically always mature, rarely lipoblast-like cells may be seen in these tumors. Angiomyolipomas have also been reported in other sites, such as lymph nodes. In general, however, the term "mesenchymoma" should be avoided and an attempt made to classify according to the predominant cell type. Lipomas The distinction between adipose tissue lobules and true lipoma occasionally arises in the practice of surgical pathology, necessitating a strict definition of lipoma. Although lipoma is well described in two major texts, definitions are concise without detail. Lipoma is herein defined as a superficial or deep-circumscribed and expansile benign neoplasm composed of mature adipose tissue, which is commonly encapsulated. Such a defini-tion emphasizes its well-differentiated and clonal nature and serves to distinguish most lipomas from normal fat and prominent posttraumatic skin folds, or "fat fractures". As Allen emphasizes, the capsule may be quite thin and poorly defined. Nonetheless, it is a crucial requirement for superficial tumors; deep lesions, on the contrary, are often nonencapsulated. When a subcuta-neous lipoma is excised in a piecemeal fashion, the lesion may be diagnosed by noting the presence of portions of capsular fibrous tissue in the form of a circular arc of col-lagen of varying width at the edge of tissue fragments. In the absence of a clear-cut capsule or fragments thereof, a diagnosis of a superficial lipoma cannot be made. Clinically, the majority of lipomas seen in surgical pathol-ogy are subcutaneous tumors typically in the middle-aged to elderly patient. Males and females are probably equally affected, and there are no racial differences. Most tumors are located on the trunk or upper extremities; if other sites are encountered, consideration should be given to one of the lipoma subtypes (eg, forearm for angiolipoma, neck for spindle and pleomorphic types). Lipomas probably outnum-ber all other soft tissue tumors combined. Interesting facts about lipomas include a nearly static size after the initial growth period; the relative rarity of lesions on the hands, feet, face, and lower leg despite the presence of fat; hardness after the application of ice, a diag-nostic sign; the lack of size reduction in starvation; a definite, but low, recurrence rate [1 to 4%]; an unknown etiology; a possible relation to potassium intake; and a possible association with an increased incidence of cancer [46%]. Many lesions of the subcutaneous region come to surgi-cal pathology labeled as lipomas; and, not uncommonly, a portion of these actually turn out to be something else that is frequently more interesting. When one views normal fat histologically, the size of fat cells appears to vary somewhat due to the sectioning plane; however, the variation is relatively small [80 to 120 urn]; ]. In lipomas, including atypical lipoma, there is a tendency for cell size to vary more widely, with larger cells being apparent. Practically, this means that a medium-power view will often disclose a two- to fivefold size range. Normal fat has a netlike structure of fibrous tissue, wherein such dispersed fibrous bands or septa dissect the adipose tissue randomly. The fibrous tissue is thicker in quality in bodily regions exposed to pressure, such as the hands, feet, and buttocks. This netlike fibrous tissue arrangement is recapitulated within lipomas, particularly at the periphery where small lobules are often found. A high Variation in fat cell size in spindle cell lipoma. Some adipocytes are three to five times the size of a normal adipocyte; compare with . Increased numbers of spindle cells together with collagen bands characterize this lipoma subtype, although the size variation seems to be present in all unusual types of lipoma. degree of vascularity is a feature associated with lipogenic malignancy, but we should be aware that this refers to a visible network of capillaries, often in strings and branch-ing arrays. However, normal adipose tissue and lipomas are likewise highly vascular, except the capillary vascular bed such as the buttock, foot, and hand, thick fibrous septa are noted throughout; these correspond to the thicker septa within the normal adipose tissue in these regions. it is frequently due to a mild but diffuse fat necrosis. B.The lipocytes are falsely enlarged by the histiocytes without much other inflammation. is more difficult to visualize. A PAS stain of a lipoma, for example, can highlight the minute but diffuse capillaries, particularly at the junctions between cells, where they are made more difficult to see due to compression. A delicate reticulin network is also present in lipomas, contributed to by the basement membranes of both lipocytes and capillar-ies; each lipocyte is completely encircled by reticulin in a manner similar to normal fat cells. Normally, lipomas have a low degree of cellularity and no nuclear atypia; the presence of either is cause for concern. Some-times increased cellularity is due to a diffuse low-grade form of fat necrosis. The ultrastructure of lipoma recapitulates that of its normal counterpart. Myxoid Change In rare lipomas, the mature fat cells are separated by vary-ing amounts of a loose basophilic ground substance, prob-ably proteoglycan. When prominent, the lesion may be designated a myxolipoma ormyxoid lipoma. The myxoid quality often raises the possibility of an MLS. However, these areas contain only widely scat-tered bland cells and are never hypercellular. Furthermore, the plexiform capillary network so typical of the malignant tumor is absent, as are lipoblasts. As Enzinger and Weiss observed, rare cells may be vacuolated but contain bluish mucoid material. Intramuscular Lipoma Deep lipomas may be either intermuscular or intramuscu-lar, with the latter unencapsulated tumors being the more common. Intramuscular lipomas, also known as "infiltrating lipomas," involve the large muscles of the extremities or the paraspinal muscles. For extremity lesions, an inap-parent mass may become visible upon voluntary contrac-tion. Microscopically, the lipocytes are typically mature, andmitoses or atypical nuclei are not found. Muscle fibers are widely dispersed throughout the lesion. Any unusual features should raise the suspicion of a well-differ-entiated liposarcoma. Often, intramuscular lipomas extend beyond the muscle fascia to involve the intervening connective tissue space. Therefore, it is often difficult to this from myxoid liposarcoma are the lack of branching capillary vessels and significant cellularity in the myxoid component. between dark individual skeletal muscle fibers in this commonly unencapsulated tumor. completely excise such lesions, and the recurrence rate is higher than that for ordinary subcutaneous lipoma. This has been particularly true for paraspinal intramuscular lipomas. Intramuscular angiolipomas are lesions considered to be intramuscular hemangiomas with a variable fat content. Lipoma arborescens is a special type of lipoma occur-ring in a joint: It has a characteristic villiform gross appear-ance, and the patients typically have a highly painful knee. The mere presence of adipose tissue on a synovial biopsy is not synonymous with this entity. OTHER ELEMENTS INLIPOMAS Aside from the ordi-nary lipoma, extraneous elements of various types can be associated with an adipose tissue benign proliferation, including combinations with epithelial or other mesenchy-mal components. MESENCHYMAL COMPONENTS Perhaps the most common mesenchymal component associated with the lipoma is, as surgical pathologists are aware, benign carti-laginous metaplasia. So-called chondrolipo-mas may occur in almost any site of the body, including the breast and mediastinum. Although the term benign mesenchymoma has been applied to such lesions, the chondroid metaplasia is practically always an extremely minor component in the form of very small isolated islands of cartilage; therefore, the designation of mesenchymoma appears to be an exaggeration (as it is when cartilaginous metaplasia occurs in liposarcoma). Allen also prefers to avoid the term mesenchymoma. Lipochondromatosis is a recently reported entity that involves the tendons and synovium of the ankle region as a mass lesion. Rarely benign osteoid is also found in lipomas, either solely or coupled with cartilage. Some of these osteolipomas are in contact with periosteum and may be termed periosteal lipoma. Smooth muscle present, often very focally; this combination alone should not be labeled a mesenchymoma. lesions, particularly of the uterus, may be combined with adipose tissue to produce lipoleiomyomas and lipo-leiomyomatosis. Prominent blood vessels are a fre-quent component of superficial small subcutaneous tumors called "angiolipomas". These lesions are interest-ing, as they may be multiple, cause pain due to frequent microthrombi, increase in size with anabolic steroids due to androgen receptors, and give rise to the differen-tial diagnosis of Kaposi's sarcoma when the angiomatoid component completely overcomes the lipocytic component. These fat-poor variants are designated cel-lular angiolipomas. In such instances, the diagnosis is adipocytes makes the tumor resemble a deep Kaposi's-like lesion; the location, circumscription, frequent microthrombi. and isolated islands of fat cells at the periphery aid in the diagnosis. made by finding rare-to-scattered mature fat cells, usually at the periphery of the lesion. Some lipomas contain an increased content of fibrous tis-sue. These usually superficial tumors have been called "fibro-lipomas." However, it is likely that the amount of fibrous tis-sue in a lipoma is directly related to its anatomic site of origin. Dense thicker fibrous tissue is typically found in lipomas of the pressure-bearing regions of the body such as the hands, feet, and buttocks; the lobular architecture accentuated by such fibrous bands may be apparent grossly. EPITHELIAL COMPONENTS In some superficial lipo-mas, eccrine glands may be incorporated into the lesion. Eccrine glands may be found at the junction of dermal collagen; the subcutaneous fat and lipomas arising in this region can cause displacement of these glands, well within the substance of the lipoma. This phenomenon has been noted in locations such as the hand and the buttock (per-sonalobservation). Adipose tissue may accompany adenomas (ie, lipoad-enomas) of the thyroid and parathyroid. Aside from lipoadenomas, other lesions of the thyroid gland may contain fat-including colloid nodules, lymphocytic thyroiditis, and papillary carcinomas. Another unusual phenomenon is the formation of the thymoli-poma. As listed in Table 7.2 [see section entitled Syndromes Associated with Fatty Lesions (Including Lipo-matosis)], an unusual lipomatous syndrome is described that consists of thyrolipoma, thymolipoma, and pharyngeal lipoma. LYMPHOCYTES INLIPOMAS Occasionally, one may observe a dense perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate in scat-tered vessels within and outside ordinary lipomas. Although not generally described, the authors have observed this phe-nomenon several times and investigated the patients; they have not exhibited evidence of chronic lymphocytic leuke-mia or autoimmune disease. Perhaps this may represent a localized host reaction to the proliferation. Special Lipoma Types In the spindle cell and pleomorphic lipomas, the fat cells appear variable in size at low power. In spindle cell lipoma, the spindle cell con-tent may vary from scanty to abundant, and the nuclei of the spindle cells are wavy, resembling nerve sheath lesions. Dense fibrous tissue is also found sometimes with a keloidal quality. Similar cells may be seen in pleomorphic lipoma, which has, in addition, characteristic floret tumor giant cells. Both of these lesions are encapsulated and have characteristic locations commonly limited to the head and the neck of elderly males. They may be related entities. Interestingly, immunoreactivity for androgen receptor has been demonstrated in the fibroblast-like spin-dle cells of spindle cell lipoma. A tumor-like fatty mass in the periorbital region may also contain floret cells similar to pleomorphic lipoma; this Floret cell. The wreath of nuclei at the periphery characterizes this cell, which is classically present in pleomorphic lipoma but may occur in some liposarcomas. entity is termed either "prolapsed orbital fat" or "subcon-junctival herniated orbital fat". The chondroid lipoma is a well-circumscribed lesion with two elements: Mature adipose tissue and focal or prominent areas containing strands and nests of eosino-philic vacuolated cells resembling chondroblasts or lipo-blasts. A hyalinized myxoid matrix is also seen. This tumor is S-100 protein, vimentin, and CD68-positive, and may be cytokeratin-positive. It occurs mainly in women in the superficial soft tissues or skeletal muscle of extremities, head, and neck. While worrisome in appearance, the lesion does not recur or metastasize. Finally, an unusual fatty tumor of the mediastinum with elastic tissue has been described as elastofibrolipoma. Lipoblastoma Frequently, a congenital lesion, the lipoblastoma is a benign solitary proliferation of fat, retaining the lobular architecture of developing fetal white adipose tissue. Nearly 90% of these superficial lesions occur before the age of 3. Interestingly, lesions tend to mature with the age of the patient. Tumors may be predominantly myxoid with spindle cells, predominantly lipocytic, or mixed; all types have a prominent capillary bed and are often encapsulated. When mature fat cells are present, they are typically in the central portion of the lobules, in turn surrounded by lobules, differentiation has started in the center. B.Within the myxoid lobules, smalilipoblasts and spindle cells are found. The spindle cells are similar to those in developing fat. collagen. In contrast, the presence of maturing adipocytes in MLS is frequently found at the periphery of the lobule. Thus, while these tumors bear a resemblance to MLS, there are clear differences, and the lobular accen-tuation with collagen is quite typical, as is the age at presentation. Rare cells resembling brown fat or hibernoma cells have been identified in lipoblastoma. If these lesions are single, they should be termed lipoblas-toma and not lipoblastomatosis; that was the original designation given appropriately by Vellios et al. in 1958 for a diffuse form. Lipoblastomatosis Lipoblastomatosis is the proper designation for the less common diffuse form of lipoblastoma. About one-third of the patients have diffuse tumors, which (in contrast to the solitary form) are usually deeply situated, more poorly cir-cumscribed, infiltrating muscle, and with a higher tendency to recur.