Muscle has at least three major functions. In addition to the obvious role in locomotion, skeletal muscle is also an impor-tant participant in general protein metabolism and in the gen-eration of heat that keeps us warm on a cold winter's night. The reader will recall that muscles are Significant reposito-ries of protein for many systemic metabolic requirements. Protein metabolism depends upon a number of factors in a healthy person. These include the rate of protein synthesis and breakdown, which in turn are determined by diet, hor-monal influences, growth, and muscular activity. In general, protein synthesis and degradation are governed by the dietary intake of amino acids. However, the aspect of muscle function that is most familiar relates to contraction, subsequent movement, and locomotion. Itis this aspect of skeletal muscle function on which we will concentrate. When a muscle undergoes contraction, it usually exerts force on a movable structure. Isotonic contraction refers to movement that changes the lengths of muscle fibers. If movement does not take place and fiber lengths do not shorten, the contraction is con-sidered to be isometric. The sustained activity of the calf muscles, which do not change length while a person is standing erect, exemplifies isometric contraction. As a rule, a single muscle does not act alone functionally. The coor-dinated actions of several muscles are usually necessary in the performance of movement. The prime movers are those muscles directly responsible for the desired motion. Antago-nists, muscles with opposite action, control the smoothness of the motion. Sometimes agonists and antagonists contract together to stabilize the joint. An understanding of muscle contraction is predicated on the concept of the motor unit. In simple terms, the motor unit consists of the anterior horn cell that resides in the spi-nal cord, its motor axon, the intramuscular branches of the main axon, and the muscle fibers innervated by the twigs. Each motor unit consists of an average of 50 to 100 muscle fibers. The interface between each muscle fiber and its terminal axon is the MEP or neuromuscular junction. There are at least seven critical steps in the process of muscle contraction, each of which are briefly described in the following text. 1. The first step is initiated by the excitation and discharge of the motor neuron or anterior horn cell within the spi-nal cord. The neuronal discharge is associated with a nerve impulse, or action potential, that is propagated along the axon to its terminal. Nerve conduction is an active process so that the impulse travels along the nerve at a constant amplitude and velocity. The impulse is due to a change in ion concentration across the cell membrane that ultimately depends upon alterations in membrane ion channels. Commensurate with depolar-ization, the voltage-gated sodium channels open, per-mitting a massive influx of sodium ions. 2.It is useful to remember that the neuromuscular junc-tion consists of PRS and POS regions that are separated by a narrow, intercellular synaptic cleft. The process of neuromuscular transmission is heralded by a depolariza-tion of the PRS axon terminal of the motor nerve, which promotes an elevation of intracellular calcium. Calcium ions gain access to the axoplasm through calcium chan-nels in the PRS membrane. In turn, the synaptic vesi-cles, which contain acetylcholine, fuse with the axon membrane. This fusion is calcium dependent and leads to a release of ACh into the extracellular space. 3. ACh molecules then cross the synaptic cleft and bind to the nicotinic AChR on the POS membrane of the mus-cle fiber. The binding of ACh to the AChR increases the sodium and potassium conductance of the muscle membrane. As a result, there is an influx of sodium ions that is accompanied by a depolarizing potential, repre-senting the endplate potential. 4. The MEP potential is transmitted along the entire muscle fiber surface to initiate the contractile response. Since the T tubules are an extension of the sarcolemma, depolarization spreads along the T tubules, which ram-ify within the sarcoplasm. Depolarization of the trans-verse tubular membrane activates the SR by means of the dihydropyridine receptors. These are voltage sensors that respond to the T tubule action potential. They are located next to the calcium channels in the T tubule membranes that trigger the release of calcium from the adjacent SR. Calcium is released from the SR through specific calcium channels known as ryanodine receptors. 5. Once calcium is released from the SR, it rapidly dif-fuses through the sarcoplasm. Calcium ions initiate contraction by binding to troponin C. In muscle at rest, troponin I is tightly bound to actin so that tropomyosin covers the sites where myosin can bind to actin. This troponin-tropomyosin complex inhibits the interaction between actin and myosin filaments. When calcium ion binds to troponin C, tropomyosin is displaced laterally, uncovering the binding sites for the myosin heads. 6. The molecular basis of muscle contraction involves the shortening of the contractile elements resulting from a sliding of the thin filaments across the thick filaments. The sliding of actin and myosin filaments occurs when the myosin heads bind to actin to form a crossbridge. X-ray crystallography has revealed that each myosin head has an actin-binding site and an ATP-binding site. The site that binds ATP is cleftlike; but, when ATP is bound and hydrolyzed by ATPase, the conformation of the myosin head changes, and the cleft appears to close. During this conformational change, the rotation of the angle of the crossbridge produces a movement called the power stroke, which advances the myosin filaments along the actin molecules. Every power stroke short-ens the muscle approximately 1 %.During contraction, numerous power strokes occur each second through crossbridge cycling and involve about 500 myosin heads on each thick filament. 7. Following contraction, the muscle relaxes as calcium ions are pumped back into the SR and calcium is released from troponin. This inhibits the interaction between actin and myosin. Muscle is sometimes conceptualized as machinery that converts chemical energy into mechanical work. Muscle contraction requires large amounts of energy, which is derived from the intermediary metabolism of lipids and car-bohydrates. The metabolism of these energy sources, which lead to the production of ATP, is beyond the scope of this chapter.