Prenatal Development The development of brown adipose tissue has been studied in animal models. The brown adipocyte precursors are spindle cells closely related to a network of capillaries which is present outside the cytoplasm. B.The same is true on PAS stain, where the basement membrane is highlighted and encompasses the pale residue of cytoplasm remaining after fixation and embedding. I ( A As the cells and vessels proliferate, they are organized into lobules by connective tissue septa. As the cells accu-mulate lipid, they initially are unilocular. However, with fur-ther lipid accumulation, multiple cytoplasmic lipid vacuoles appear. As in white fat, the close association of developing adipocytes and blood vessels has led some to speculate that adipocytes actually develop from endothelial cells. Although similar ultrastructural features are cited as supportive evi-dence of theory, more recent investigations have attributed these similarities to a common origin from undifferentiated mesenchyme. In fact, ultrastructural and biochemical stud-ies that have examined developing BAT have shown that unique features such as large mitochondria and a unique mitochondrial protein are found early in development and distinguish brown from white fat. Recent studies suggest that brown fat precursors may also be recruited directly from white adipose tissue and skeletal muscle. Fetal necropsy studies have identified lobules of devel-oping brown fat in the human fetus. The largest of these are from the posterior cervical, axillary, suprailiac, and perirenal regions. Those in the neck and axillae are closely associated with the major blood vessels of these regions in such a way that they extend along the course of the cervicalB appears relatively uniform. B. At high power, pale areas represent portions of basement membrane and cytoplasm cut on the bias. Nuclei of capillary endothelial cells are present at intersections between multiple cells. C. In contrast to other nuclei, an ideal section of an adipocyte nucleus shows a pale character due to its thin nature and the common central vacuole, or "Locherne." The wrinkled cell outlines are an artifact occasionally seen, the result of improper fixation. blood vessels into the root of the neck. The suprailiac col-lections lie deep to the abdominal muscles, yet superficial to the peritoneum, and invest the anterior abdominal wall to the diaphragm. Intermediate-sized brown fat pads are seen in the interscapular paralateral trapezius and deltoid regions. Small collections are evident in the intercostal area. In this study, no difference was noted in distribu-tion between the sexes or among the races. The amount of brown fat increases in proportion to growth throughout life. Deposits are well-established by the fifth month of gestation. Postnatal Development The presence of brown fat beyond the neonatal period in humans has been debated. An autopsy study by Heaton, however, has identified lobules of brown fat through-out life to the eighth decade. Brown fat is most widely distributed in young children and, over the next several decades, gradually disappears from most sites. In children younger than 10 years, identifiable deposits of brown fat were identified in the interscapular region, around the neck vessels and muscles, around the structures of the medias-tinum, and adjacent to the lung hila. Intra-abdominal and , , vasculature; note the thin and delicate fibrous tissue septa. retroperitoneal deposits were noted around the kidneys, pancreas, spleen, mesocolon, and omentum, as well as in the anterior abdominal wall. The extremities were not sam-pled. Although brown fat disappeared from most areas, it was found to persist around the kidneys, adrenals, and aorta and within the mediastinum and neck throughout adult life. As in fetal life, no difference in distribution based on gen-der was noted. Function The main function of BAT is heat production. It has been estimated that the maximal aerobic capacity per gram of tissue is almost 10 times that of skeletal muscle. It has been estimated that even in humans the small quantities of brown fat present are capable of raising heat production by over 20%. The production of heat is closely related to the active sympathetic innervation of brown fat and stimulation by norepinephrine. Release of norepinephrine results in the production of cyclic adenosine monophos-phate and lipolysis to release free fatty acids. These undergo oxidation within the mitochondria to produce adenosine triphosphate. Brown fat mitochondria contain a unique uncoupling protein, also known as "thermogenin," which uncouples the oxidation of fatty acids from gen-eration of adenosine triphosphate. The resultant energy is dissipated as heat. In small rodents and hibernat-ing animals, brown fat is activated by cold temperatures to produce heat, resulting in what is known as "nonshiveringthermogenesis." Teleologically, this would be useful in those at risk for hypothermia. Thus, neonates, unable to alter the external environment in order to maintain body tem-perature, would be expected to have relatively more active brown fat than do adults. In addition, brown fat accumu-lation and activation may playa role in weight regulation. Experimentally, overfed rats show a compensatory increase in brown fat activation in metabolic rate, minimizing weight gain. Many types of obesity in laboratory mice and rats are related to defective regulation of BAT, including that seen in oblob mice. In contrast, exaggerated leanness may be associated with excessive BAT responsiveness to external factors, such as sympathetic stimulation. Although BAT is present in humans, its role in weight regulation, obesity, and thermal regulation in adults remains contro-versial. Increased amounts of periadrenal brown fat in malnourished people at autopsy suggest a compensatory increase in nonshivering thermogenesis to maintain body temperature in those with diminished subcutaneous fat and cachexia . Regulation Unlike white fat, brown fat is highly innervated and regu-lated by sympathetic stimulation. Nerves enter each lobe and branch within the interlobular septa, running along the vessels to terminate on the fat cells. Brown fat cells have numerous ~1- and ~2-adrenoreceptors that regulate lipolysis and thermogenesis. The a-adrenoreceptors, although present, probably do not act directly in heat production. Norepinephrine may also act to increase the number and character of brown fat cells. Using continuous infusions of norepinephrine, Mory et al. have shown that such chronic sympathetic stim-ulation results in increased cellularity, increased protein content, and increased mitochondrial density in brown fat. Because of this close association of sympathetic activ-ity and brown fat activity, several investigators have used pheochromocytoma as a model to study brown fat activi-ties in humans. These studies have provided evidence supportive of early autopsy studies. Functional BAT was identified in adults with pheochromocytomas that had similar biochemical features to the better-characterized BAT of rodents. Hormones also playa role in brown fat regulation, but it is minor in comparison to the sympathetic system. Thyroid hormone, although active in regulating metabolic rate, has little importance in diet-induced or nonshivering thermo-genesis. Insulin stimulates glucose intake into BAT. Both cortisol and gonadal steroid hormones inhibit thermo-genesis, thus promoting energy conservation. Histology The term brown fat was applied to this tissue because of its characteristic gross appearance. It is incorrect to refer to it as "fetal" fat because it is present throughout life. The abundant vascularity and numerous mitochondria within placed nuclei and multivacuolated cytoplasm. Rare cells are nonvacuolated. An arborizing thin capillary network is noted. the cells impart a characteristic reddish-brown color to the tissue. Brown fat has a glandular lobulated appearance. This is in contrast to the more diffuse growth pattern of white fat. Histologically, brown fat is organized into lob-ules of cells that are made up of adipocytes, capillaries, nerves, and connective tissue. These are surrounded by a thin, fibrous capsule containing blood vessels, nerves, and scattered white adipose cells. The cells are polygo-nal in shape, with a mixture of multivacuolated and uni-vacuolated cells. The occurrence of both cell types is emphasized, and their presence in develop-ing white fat initially confused studies on its origin. The multivacuolated cell, characteristic of brown fat, has a highly granular cytoplasm with numerous lipid inclusions. Its granular appearance is due to the numerous mitochon-dria necessary for thermogenesis. The nucleus is spherical and often centrally located, although a large lipid inclusion may displace it toward the periphery of the cell or, rarely, to the extreme perimeter. Small nucleoli are common. The unilobular cells are indistinguishable histologically from the mature signet-ring cell-type white adipocytes but are different ultrastructurally. On average, the size of the brown fat cells is smaller than that of white adipocytes, approximately 25 to 40 urn, In animals that hibernate, marked seasonal variation in cell size has been noted. Both exposure to cold and starvation result in lipid depletion, causing reduction in cell size and wrinkling of the cell membrane. Brown adipose cells are surrounded by a network of col-lagen fibers that contain numerous minute nerve axons and blood vessels. Nonmyelinated axons terminate on the fat cells, providing an avenue for direct sympathetic regulation. The vascularity is quite prominent with numerous capillar-ies coursing between the adipocytes. It is estimated in rats that the vascularity of brown fat is four to six times greater than that of white fat.HISTOCHEMISTRY Enzyme Histochemistry In development, enzyme histochemistry within develop-ing adipocytes is related to the stage of adipocyte differ-entiation. In fact, in some systems, such as the rat, it is clear that enzymatic differentiation of adipocytes precedes morphologic differentiation. In regions destined to become adipose tissue, undifferentiated morphology is initially present without a capillary bed and without any enzymatic capacity. Subsequently, immature cells or what can be termed "preadipocytes" exist in the form of spindle cells within an area containing a capillary bed. These cells lack any lipid or a basal lamina and have a large comple-ment of enzymatic activity; but they lack the capability to release fat as a result of the absence of esterase. In mature lobules, adipocytes in the form of rounded cells now contain lipid, a basal lamina, and a well-developed cap-illary bed; the entire complement of enzymatic activity is present, including NADH-tetrazolium reductase, ADPH-tetrazolium reductase, and glucose 6-phosphate dehydroge-nase. Malate dehydrogenase activity is acquired only by late-stage adipocytes. Hausman dem-onstrated the presence of such enzymatic differentiation before the assumption of an obviously rounded cell shape consistent with an adipocyte. Lipoprotein lipase is an enzyme found at high con-centration in fatty tissues. It is involved in the transport of serum triglycerides into adipocytes in the form of fatty acids. However, it can be found in other tissues such as skeletal muscles and cardiac muscle, where it may be localized to endothelial cells. Concentration in fat is directly related to the serum insulin concentration. Lipid Histochemistry Lipids in adipose tissue are generally identified using vari-ous stains, such as oil red 0and Sudan IV. It should be noted that lipids are lost in formaldehyde after prolonged fixation, and, thus, cases to be tested using fro-zen cryostat sections of fixed material should be obtained as soon as possible. Of the two time-honored lipid stains mentioned, oil red 0gives the more intense stain and is more rapid to perform. Sudan black B may stain nonlipid substances nonspecifically. As a rule, neutral fats are detected using these fat stains. How-ever, a differential staining pattern between neutral fats and fatty acid components and phospholipids can be obtained with the Nile blue sulfate stain; with this stain, neu-tral fat stains pink to red, and fatty acids and phospholipids stain bluish. The lipid composition of fatty tissues may also be investigated using new techniques such as the hot-stage polarizing-light microscopic method. The normal composition of lipid in white adipose tis-sue consists of 99% triglyceride in the form of neutral fat and less than 1 %in the form of phospholipid, cholesterol, and fatty acids. In less-differentiated adipocytes, such as those found in liposarcomas, there is a shift away from neutral fat to phospholipids and cholesterol. Unfortu-nately, lipid stains appear to have little use in the everyday examination of adipocyte lesions. The droplets seen on the stains may represent nonspecific staining, and various other mesenchymal lesions may contain lipid. An exception is the distinction between lesions with artificial vacuoles, such as epithelioid smooth muscle lesions, which are nega-tive with fat stains. Intracellular Lipid in Nonadipocytes Lipid may accumulate in various other cell types and in nonadipocytic tumors. Steatosis According to Stedman's Medical Dictionary, steatosis has two main meanings: Adiposis and fatty degeneration. These terms are unclear, and the distinction between intracellular lipid accumulation and adipocyte infiltration of organs is not made. When nonadipocytes store lipid intracellularly, the phrase lipid accumulation is accurate; in the liver, the term steatosis is used; and, in major pathology texts, the term appears to be applied solely to the hepatocyte. How-ever, intracytoplasmic lipid can be found within other solid organs, such as the heart [in the myocardial fibers in hypoxia] and the kidney [in the renal tubule in dia-betes, poisonings, Reye's syndrome]. Theoretically, there is no reason why these processes cannot be referred to as myocardial or renal tubular steatosis. Regardless, in referring to intracellular lipid accumulation, terms such as lipid accumulation orsteatosis are preferable to unclear and archaic designations, such as adiposis orfatty degeneration. Discussion of adipocyte infiltration of organs is found later [see the section entitled Syndromes Associated With Fatty Lesions]. Lipid accumulation may occur in the placenta after prolonged parenteral nutrition; there, it takes the form of foamy vacuoles within the syncytial and Hofbauer cells of the chorionic villi. Aside from adipocytes, lipid in the form of cholesterol and cholesterol esters may be identified in cells with a steroid-producing function in organs, such as the adrenal, ovary, and testis. In addition, other types of lipid are found within various tumors. In practice, it is generally thought that a lipid staincan aid in the differential diagnosis of certain tumors. For example, it is well-known that renal cell carcinomas typically contain lipid, and most pathologists have the impression that many other tumors do not. However, it is clear from stud-ies four decades ago that fat stains are positive in the majority of cancers. Thus, there are problems with the use of the fat stain in the diagnosis of carcinoma,Squamous cell carcinoma Ovarian carcinoma Gastric carcinoma Breast carcinoma Lung carcinomas Prostatic carcinoma Renal cell carcinoma Thyroid carcinoma Lymphoma, large cell Myeloma aForthe majority of cancer types, a high percentage of the tumors listed showed a positive reaction. Source: Elizalde N, Korman S. Cytochemical studies of glycogen, neutral mucopolysaccharides, and fat in malignant tissues. Cancer 1968;21 :1061-1068. and caution should be exercised in interpretation. Further-more, although some clear cell lesions in the differential diagnosis of renal cancer contain glycogen (benign sugar tumor of lung), others such as xanthoma of bone contain lipid-and thus a fat stain is of no assistance.