Development of the human mammary gland begins during the fifth week of gestation, at which time thickenings of the ectoderm appear on the ventral surface of the fetus. These mammary ridges, also known as milk lines, extend from the axilla to the groin. Except for a small area in the pectoral region, the bulk of these ridges normally regressTHE ADULT MALE BREAST 78 BIOLOGIC MARKERS, IMMUNOPHENOTYPE, AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY 78 Estrogen Receptor and Progesterone Receptor 78 Other Biomarkers and Immunophenotypic Features 79 Molecular Markers 79 CONCLUSION 79 REFERENCES 79 as the fetus continues to develop. Failure of regression of other portions of the milk lines can result in the appearance in postnatal life of ectopic mammary tissue or accessory nipples anywhere along the milk lines; this phenomenon is most commonly encountered in the axilla, inframammary fold, and vulva. The earliest stages of breast development are largely independent of sex steroid hormones. After the 15th week of gestation, the developing breast exhibits transient sensitivity to testosterone, which acts primarily on the mesenchyme. Under the influence of testosterone, the mesenchyme condenses around an epithelial stalk on the chest wall to form the breast bud, the site of mammary gland development. Solid epithelial columns then develop within the mesenchyme, and these ultimately give rise to the lobes or segments of the mammary gland. Portions of the fetal papillary dermis encase the developing epithelial cords and eventually give rise to the vascularized fibrous connective tissue that surrounds and invests the mammary ducts and lobules. More collagen-rich reticular dermis extends into the breast to form the suspensory ligaments of Cooper, which attach the breast parenchyma to the skin. Portions of the mesenchyme differentiate into fat within the collagenous stroma between the 20th and 32nd weeks of gestation. During the last 8 weeks of gestation, the epi-thelial cords canalize and branch, forming lobuloalveolar structures as a result of mesenchymal paracrine effects. A depression in the epidermis, the mammary pit, forms at in a loose connective tissue stroma. The stromal mononuclear cells are hematopoietic elements, indicative of persistent extramedullary hematopoiesis. (Courtesy of Theonia Boyd, MD, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA.) the convergence of the lactiferous ducts. The nipple forms by evagination of the mammary pit near the time of birth. During the last few weeks of gestation, the fetal mam-mary gland is responsive to maternal and placental steroid hormones, and, as a result, the epithelial cells in the acinar units exhibit secretory activity. At the time of birth, with-drawal of the maternal and placental sex steroids stimulates prolactin secretion, which, in turn, stimulates colostrum secretion. At this time, both male and female neonates exhibit palpable enlargement of the breast bud. As the serum levels of maternal and placental sex steroid hor-mones and prolactin decline during the first month of life, secretory activity ends and the gland regresses and becomes inactive. At this stage, and until puberty, the breast consists primarily of lactiferous ducts that exhibit some branching without evidence of progressive alveolar differentiation, although some rudimentary lobular structures may persist. Another feature that may be seen in the fetal breast is extramedullary hematopoiesis, and this may persist in the periductal stroma until 4 months of age.