The principal consideration in differential diagnosis of pituitary lesions is the distinction of normal pituitary tis-sue from adenoma. The most conspicuous architectural feature of the adenohypophysis is the arrangement of its cells in acini that, depending on orientation of section, vary from round to oval or somewhat elongate. The acini are sur-rounded by a delicate reticulin- or PAS-positive capillary network. In contrast, pituitary adenomas lack this uniform acinar architecture, showing only scant reticulin that is limited to scattered vessels. The optic chiasm is at the upper portion of the field; the anterior lobe is at the lower portion of the field (H&E, original magnification x20). B. High-power view of a granular cell tumorlet. Such nodules are composed of pituicytes, modified glial cells, with abundant lysosome-rich eosinophilic cytoplasm. Tumorlets, as well as individual granular cells, are of no clinical significance. noma. Compare the acinar pattern of the normal adenophypophysis tupper left) with the adenoma ibottcm right) ~Wilder reticulin, original magnification xl00). Although most normal pituitary acini are heterogeneous in their cellular content, thus permitting the distinction of normal from adenomatous tissue on H&E sections alone, some parts of the pituitary contain largely a single cell type and appear fairly monomorphous. For instance, eosino-philic GH cells are present in large numbers in the lateral wings. On the other hand, occasional adenomas composed of mixed cell populations (often ones associated with acro-megaly) superficially resemble normal adenohypophysis. As a result, the distinction of normal from adenomatous tissue may be more easily achieved by reticulin staining than by immunohistochemistry alone. Small biopsies of the intermediate lobe may include the so-called basophilic invasion normally seen in the posterior pituitary. Since these basophilic cells are arranged diffusely or in clusters, and lack the typi-cal acinar formation seen in the anterior pituitary, they may be mistaken for ACTH-microadenomas. A limited biopsy of the pituitary may occasionally include intermediate zone cysts, which are normal deriva-tives of Rathke's cleft. Correlation with radiologic and operative data usually obviates confusion with Rathke's cleft cyst. Clinically significant cysts are readily evident on neuroimaging and are identified as sizable cysts by the expe-rienced surgeon. As previously noted above, adenohypophysial cells may undergo squamous metaplasia, particularly in the pars tube-ralis. This location is only occasionally sampled in surgi-cal specimens. Scant in extent, intimately associated with adenohypophysial cells, and cytologically benign, they are unlikely to be confused with either cysts (epidermoid or dermoid cysts) or with neoplasms. In very small numbers, cytologic benign lymphocytes are seen in the intermediate zone of the normal pituitary in10% of autopsied subjects. Unassociated with endo-crine disease, such cells are readily distinguished from the far more widespread and dense infiltrates of lymphocytic hypophysitis or abscess. A limited biopsy of the neurohypophysis can readily be mistaken for glioma in that the vast majority of its nucleated cells are specialized astrocytes. Unlike pituicy-tomas, the tumor most closely mimicked by posterior pitu-itary tissue, the neurohypophysis contains large numbers of axons terminating on vessels. Of these axons, some possess PAS-positive swellings. Secondary involve-ment of the pituitary by more ordinary diffuse astrocytomas is exceedingly rare.