Several findings in skeletal muscle biopsies are normal or are minor variations that may be mistaken for pathologic change. These include internal nuclei, ring fibers, hyaline fibers, excessive endomysial connective tissue, perivascular by wrinkling or folding of the sarcoplasm. Nuclear internalization. Several fibers contain internal pyknotic nuclei, a common nonspecific pathologic change. inflammation, variations in fiber diameters, and ragged red fibers. One of the most common pathologic abnormalities in muscle biopsies is nuclear internalization. Quantitative analyses have demonstrated that the nuclei are peripherally located in 97 to 99% of normal muscle fibers, which means that up to 3% of fibers with internal nuclei is a normal finding. In many different conditions, an increase in internal nuclei is found, typically affecting 5 to 10% of fibers and particularly those that are mildly atro-phic. Nuclear internalization has no specific diagnostic sig-nificance and appears to be a reaction to virtually any type of injury. The diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy should be strongly considered if the majority of fibers contain internal nuclei. One must exercise caution in interpreting the signifi-cance of ring fibers in specimens disrupted by contrac-tion artifact because, in this situation, ring fibers are not a genuine pathologic change. In properly processed, uncon-tracted muscle biopsies, ring fibers are a pathologic crite-rion of myotonic disorders. The ring is formed by a bundle of peripheral myofibrils that are circumferentially oriented such that they encircle the internal portion of the sarco-plasm, which is normal in structure and orientation. In cross sections of muscle, the ring is especially well visual-ized in PAS stains where the striations of the transversely oriented peripheral myofibrils are seen in contrast to the inner sarcoplasmic contents. Rings are also seen to advantage in PTAH stains, resin sections, or under phase-contrast microscopy. Under the electron microscope, the pathologically oriented myofibrils are generally normal in structure except for hypercontraction of the sarcomeres. Along with ring fibers, hyaline fibers are evident in specimens damaged by contraction artifact. These fibers are abnormally increased in diameter and rounded in configura-tion. Their sarcoplasm in both paraffin and frozen sections is oriented, forming rings that encircle transversely sectioned fibers. smudged or glassy and more deeply stained than in normal fibers. The hyaline appearance is the legacy of hypercontraction, as shown in electron microscopic stud-ies. In clamped specimens that are free of excessive con-traction, true hyaline fibers are a common feature of Duch-enne muscular dystrophy. The pathogenesis of true hyaline fiber formation, which is believed to precede subsequent fiber necrosis, is apparently related to excessive irritability secondary to cell membrane instability. It is possible that sarcolemmal damage allows excessive contraction and also promotes cell necrosis. In serial sections of hyaline fibers, areas of necrosis may be found, indicating the importance of hyalinization as a sign of fiber destruction. darkly stained sarcoplasm Infant muscle. A relative increase in perimysial connec-tive tissue is normal. Excessive quantities of endomysial connective tissue usually represent reactive fibrosis accompanying neuro-muscular disease. However, as pointed out above, at the interface between muscle and tendons or fascia, abundant connective tissue is normally present and should not be regarded as reactive fibrosis. Although endomysial connec-tive tissue is not prominent in the biopsies of infants, as indicated previously, the perimysial connective tissue far exceeds the amount present in older children and adults. Interstitial and perivascular inflammatory cells almost always reflect clinical disease, most frequently immuno-logically mediated or idiopathic inflammatory myopathies such as polymyositis or dermatomyositis. However, in the biopsies of infants it is better to remember that small foci of hematopoiesis are normally present and do not represent true inflammatory infiltrates. Muscles subjected to trauma such as EMC needles may harbor foci of inflammation for months following the diagnostic study and are not clinically significant. One of the most demanding challenges to the diagnos-tic pathologist is the muscle biopsy characterized by a varia-tion in fiber diameters or by what appears to be atrophy or hypertrophy. The utility of enzyme histochemistry in these situations cannot be overstated. It is important to recall from previous discussions that a normal variation in fiber size occurs at the junctions of muscle fibers and either tendons or fascia and what at first seems to be atrophy may be normal, depending upon the muscle examined and upon the patient's age and sex. Smaller muscles, and especially those devoted to finely coordinated activities, have much smaller diameters than large, bulky muscles. Muscle fibers are expected to be much smaller in infants and children than in mature adults, and, as previously noted, there is an increas-ing reduction in fiber diameters with advancing age. The sig-nificance of fiber hypertrophy should be evaluated in light of the patient's activity and level of regular exercise. In evaluat-ing fiber size, it may be necessary to measure fiber diameters. Morphometric analysis of the muscle biopsy is impera-tive when the changes in fiber diameters are minimal and subtle. In order to obtain statically significant morphomet-ric data, the lesser diameter of each muscle fiber should be determined, based on a minimum number of 200 fibers in the sample. The atrophic or hypertrophic process may be selective, affecting only one fiber type, or it may be non-selective. True selective atrophy of type 1 fibers is most commonly encountered in myotonic dystrophy. Type 2 fiber atrophy is a common finding in acute denervation, disuse, and myasthenia gravis. True hypertrophy of type 1 fibers is relatively specific for infantile spinal muscular atrophy. True type 2 fiber hypertrophy is generally restricted to congenital fiber-type disproportion. The pattern of atrophy is important in distinguishing between normal and abnormal. Randomly distributed small or large fibers may be normal, depending on other factors discussed above. Grouped atrophy, where five or more small angular fibers cluster together is essen-tially diagnostic of chronic neurogenic disease. Panfascicu-lar atrophy, in which the majority of fibers in each fascicle are atrophic, is virtually specific for infantile spinal muscle atrophy. Perifascicular atrophy is typical of dermatomyositis. Ragged red fibers can be observed in elderly people. These fibers are recognized in RTC stains performed on frozen sections, where they exhibit an irregular surface and collections of red-staining subsarcolemmal material . The ragged red areas represent foci of increased, often abnormal mitochondria. Ragged red fibers are gener-ally the hallmark of the mitochondrial myopathies, which are characterized by mitochondrial dysfunction and often mutations of mitochondrial genes. It is now known that mitochondrial damage occurs in the aging cell, including skeletal muscle. Ragged red fibers are considered to be a RTC stain as having an irregular sarcolemmal surface with collections of red-staining rnaterial Ifif'C].reflection of this damage, which may be associated with clinical disease but frequently is not.