Lymphatic drainage of the breast occurs through four routes: cutaneous, axillary, internal thoracic, and posterior intercostal lymphatics. The cutaneous lymphatic drainage system consists of both a superficial plexus of channels that lie within the dermis overlying the breast and a deeper network of lymphatic channels that runs with the mam-mary ducts in the subareolar area. Most of these cutaneous channels drain to the ipsilateral axilla. Cutaneous lymphat-ics from the inferior aspect of the breast may drain to the epigastric plexus and ultimately to the lymphatic channels of the liver and intra-abdominal lymph nodes. There are three lymphatic drainage pathways in the mammary parenchyma. The most important drainage basin for lymphatic flow from the breast is the axilla, and the axillary lymph nodes receive the vast majority of the lymph drained. The internal thoracic lymphatic route carries less than 10% of the lymphatic flow from the breast and ulti-mately terminates in the internal mammary lymph nodes. Drainage eventually empties into the great veins via the thoracic duct, the lower cervical nodes, or the jugular-subclavian confluence. The third and least important route of mammary lymphatic drainage is the posterior intercos-tal lymphatics, which drain into the posterior intercostal lymph nodes. An understanding of the lymphatic drainage of the breast is of particular importance in the current era of sentinel lymph node biopsy because this explains the occasional finding of sentinel lymph nodes outside of the axilla.THE ADULT MALE BREAST The adult male breast, like the female breast, is composed of glandular epithelial elements embedded in a stroma that is composed of varying amounts of collagen and adipose tis-sue. However, in contrast to the adult female breast, the epithelial elements of the male breast normally consist of branching ducts without lobule formation. BIOLOGIC MARKERS, IMMUNOPHENOTYPE, AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY Estrogen Receptor and Progesterone Receptor It is now known that there are at least two different estro-gen receptors, ERa and ER~; ERa has been far more extensively studied. Using immunohistochemistry, ERa expression can be demonstrated in the nuclei of both duc-tal and lobular epithelial cells, with a higher proportion in lobules than in ducts. However, even in the lobules, only a small proportion of the cells show ERa immunoreactivity. Most often, ERa-positive cells in the lobules are distributed singly, admixed with and surrounded by ERa-negative cells. Furthermore, there is considerable het-erogeneity in staining for ERa among lobules in the same breast. Of interest, in breast tissue from premenopausal women, there is generally an inverse relationship between expression of ERa and markers of cell proliferation. In par-ticular, most ERa-positive cells do not show expression of the proliferation-related antigen Ki-67 and Ki-67-positive cells are typically ERa-negative. The proportion of ERa-positive cells gradually increases with age but remains relatively sta-ble after the menopause. The incidence of lobules showing contiguous patches of ERa-positive cells also increases both lobule. A minority of epithelial cells show nuclear staining. with age and with involutional changes. In addition, the proportion of ERa-positive proliferating cells increases with age. In premenopausal women, ERa expression varies with the phase of the menstrual cycle, being higher in the follicular than in the luteal phase. Myoepithelial cells do not show ERa immunoreactivity. Recent studies have indicated that a second form of ER, ER~, is also expressed in normal breast tissue. Expres-sion of ERP has been observed not only in epithelial cells of ducts and lobules but also in myoepithelial cells, endothe-lial cells, and stromal cells. The expression of this form of ER does not seem to vary with the phase of the menstrual cycle. It has been speculated that the relative levels of ERP and ERa may be important in determining the risk of breast cancer development and that higher lev-els of ERP relative to ERa are protective against neoplastic progression in the breast. However, additional studies are needed to more clearly elucidate the role of ERP both in normal breast physiology and in breast cancer pathogenesis. Expression of PR has not been as extensively studied in normal breast tissue as has been ER. Like ERa, PR is expressed in the nuclei of ductal and lobular epithelium. However, in contrast to ERa expression, PR expression does not seem to vary with the menstrual cycle phase. Other Biomarkers and Immunophenotypic Features Expression of a wide variety of biomarkers has been studied in benign breast tissue and a comprehensive review of these is beyond the scope of this chapter. However, a few merit brief mention. Rarely, normal breast epithelium may show HER2 protein overexpression, p53 protein accumu-lation, or p53 mutations, but, the clinical Significance of these findings is uncertain. The antiapoptotic protein bcl-2 is consistently expressed by normal breast epithelial cells. The S-100 protein is strongly expressed by normal myoepithelial cells and variably expressed by mammary epithelial cells. Epithelial cells also show variable expression for casein, a-lactalbumin, gross cystic disease fluid protein-15, mammaglo-bin, and c-kit, among other proteins. As noted earlier, cytokeratins 7, 8,18, and 19 are typi-cally expressed by epithelial cells, whereas myoepithelial cells express cytokeratins 5/6, 14, and 17. Molecular Markers The ability to evaluate DNA, RNA, and protein using the modern tools of molecular biology, particularly when guided by such techniques as laser capture microdissection, will greatly enhance our understanding of breast tumori-genesis and may even serve to redefine what constitutes "normal." For example, a number of studies have shown that histologically normal TDLUs can exhibit an abnormal genotype, characterized by loss of heterozygosity, allelic imbalance at various chromosomal loci, or altered gene expression profiles. At this time, however,the significance of these genetic and molecular alterations in histologically normal breast tissue remains to be deter-mined. Studies of normal breast tissue using these tech-niques will also help define further the presence and nature of progenitor cells or stem cells and their role in breast development and carcinogenesis, as well as pat-terns of gene and protein expression that distinguish normal from abnormal breast tissue and cells.