The ultrastructural examination of skeletal muscle is con-ventionally performed on sections oriented longitudinally, wherein deviations from the orderly striated architecture rounded by a capsule composed of concentric layers of cells. are more easily detected than in cross sections. The sarco-plasm of each muscle fiber is divided into multiple paral-lel subunits, the myofibrils, which are minute, cylindroid contractile structures measuring approximately 1 11min diameter. Myofibrils are segmented into a series of identical sarcomeres that are equal in length, whether the muscle is contracted or at rest, and are aligned in register with the sarcomeres of surrounding myofibrils. The unique periodic-ity of the fine structure of the muscle fiber is a function of the regimentation of this contractile system. The rectangu-lar banding pattern within each sarcomere is produced by the arrangement of the filaments. The Z band, which forms the lateral boundaries of the sarcomere, is an electron-dense bar-shaped structure oriented perpendicular to the long axis of the myofibril. The distance between con-secutive Z bands represents the sarcomere length, an aver-age of 2.5 to 3.0 11m.The I bands are the most electron-lucent portions of the sarcomere and stand in dramatic contrast to register. Each is composed of a series of sarcomeres that contain A, I, and Z band regions.the dark Z bands that bisect them. The I bands are shorter in length than the moderately dense A bands located at the center of the sarcomeres. Within each sarcomere are stacks of parallel filaments that, under the electron microscope, appear to be of two types. The thicker filaments measure 15 nm in diameter and are principally composed of myosin. The thinner filaments, containing chiefly actin, are 8 nm in diameter. The thin filaments are attached to the Z band and extend across the I band, where only thin filaments are found. They penetrate the A band in which alternating thick and thin filaments are visualized. Thick filaments, on the contrary, are restricted to the A band region of the sar-comere and determine its length. The sarcoplasmic organelles are more concentrated around the sarcolemmal nuclei and between the myofibrils. The mitochondria are somewhat variable in shape and size, although the majority of them are oval or elliptical in con-figuration and l.011m in greatest dimension. They are most easily recognized adjacent to the Z bands where their long axes are parallel to those of the myofibrils. Both mitochon-dria and lipid vacuoles are more conspicuous in oxidative fibers. Glycogen, composed of granules with a diameter of 15 to 30 nm, is more abundant in glycolytic fibers, particularly in the I band region of the sarcomere. The sarcoplasmic reticulum and the transverse tubules together comprise the sarcotubular complex. The SR, which is analogous to the endoplasmic reticulum of other cells, is an elaborate system of tubules that, by branching in all direc-tions, surrounds the myofibrils. In contrast to the SR, which has no communication with the extracellular space, the T tubules arise as invaginations from the cell membrane. They are observed at regular intervals along the length of the fiber, particularly at the junction of the A and I bands. The T tubules encircle the myofibrils and are disposed in a predominantly transverse direction. Branches of the sar-cotubular complex join together as triads at the A-I band junctions. Here, pairs of terminal cisterns derived from the SR are positioned on either side of a central T tubule. In this location, the SR tubules appear as hollow, membrane-bound profiles, whereas the T tubules are somewhat more electron dense. Satellite cells are a population of myoblastic stem cells that are a source of nuclei during muscle growth, particu-larly hypertrophy. Satellite cells also have the capacity to synthesize new muscle after myocyte injury. These primi-tive, indeterminate cells can, under appropriate circum-stances, be transformed into blastic elements that serve as an important source of fiber regeneration. Satellite cells represent approximately 10%of the myonuclei seen in cross sections of muscle. There is a decline in the number of sat-ellite cells as a result of the aging process so that they con-stitute only 2to 3% of myofiber nuclei in older individuals. Satellite cells are small, mononuclear, fusiform cells that are situated beneath the basement membrane of neighbor-ing muscle fibers. They cannot be reliably distinguished from the muscle fiber nuclei under the light microscope. Satellite cells are not randomly distributed along the length of the muscle fiber and are more numerous in certain loca-tions such as the sole plates of the neuromuscular junction and the polar regions of the muscle spindles. Ultrastruc-turally, the nuclei of satellite cells differ somewhat from the nuclei of muscle fibers. They are more elongated, their nuclear chromatin is peripherally dense, and nucleoli are lacking. The satellite cell nuclei are usually asymmetrical within the cytoplasm, which contains only a few filaments without evidence of sarcomere formation. The sarcoplasm also contains free ribosomes, microtubules, and centrioles, which may be associated with cilia. Where the cell mem-branes of the satellite cell and muscle fiber are opposed, numerous pinocytotic vesicles are seen. SPECIAL TECHNUIUES Perhaps more than any other tissue, skeletal muscle in humans has been studied using a wide variety of special-ized techniques, in part because human muscle biopsies are frequently collected in such a way as to make both fresh, unfixed tissue and material for special studies available. In addition to routine histochemical methods that are focused primarily on the identification of fiber types, a number of other histochemical procedures have been employed for the study of both normal and abnormal skeletal muscle. An array of histochemical techniques has been developed to provide greater understanding of muscle metabolism. Among these are histochemical techniques to identify various enzymes involved in glycoge metabolism and glycolysis. Familiar examples are histochemical stains for phosphorylase and phosphofructokinase. Other histochemical procedures have been developed to study mitochondrial function. The most widely used is the histochemical stain for cytochrome oxi-dase. In the workup of human disease, histochemical analy-sis of muscle tissue can be supplemented by biochemical analysis, specifically when histochemical techniques are unavailable. It is also best, whenever possible, to confirm histochemical findings with biochemical studies. Biochemi-cal analysis has been particularly useful in the study of mitochondrial disease, examining such parameters as the respiratory chain. Molecular techniques are being used with increasing frequency in elucidating normal muscle devel-opment as well as muscle disease. A number of abnormal conditions can now be diagnosed using molecular strategies. These include Duchenne dystrophy and other dystrophinop-athies and certain mitochondrial disorders in which there is a defect in the mitochondrial genome. As mentioned above, it seems likely that the genes that are being discovered in developmental biology one day will contribute to our under-standing and diagnosis of muscle disease. Several techniques have been adapted for the study of intramuscular blood vessels. For example, capillaries are Checkerboard pattern is seen with dark type 2 fibers and pale type 1 fibers. particularly well seen in histochemical procedures for alka-line phosphatase. Capillaries are also nicely demonstrated in immunohistochemical stains for factor VIII. Immunohistochemistry is an emerging field in pathol-ogy that has begun to find a niche in the study of muscle. As already described, muscle fiber typing can be done in frozen sections using histochemical stains such as ATPase. Antibodies to fast and slow myosins are now available for the identification of type 1and type 2 muscle fibers in fixed tissue. It is also possible to subdivide type 2 fibers into types 2A and 2B using myosin antibodies. Fibers undergoing regeneration can be detected by immu-nohistochemical methods. Regenerating fibers contain fetal myosins and react with antibodies to vimentin and desmin. Recently, visualization of the membrane-associated pro-teins, dystrophin, and the family of sarcoglycans has become practical. Antibodies to dystrophin, as well as to some of the dystrophin-associated glycopro-teins, permit the diagnosis of Duchenne dystrophy, selected for dystrophin). Protein Muscle Disease Dystrophin Duchenne muscular dystropy; Becker type muscular dystrophy Lamin AIC LGMD 1B Dysferlin LGMD 2B Sarcoglycans LGMD 2C-2F Fukutin Congenital muscular dystrophy Merosin Congenital muscular dystrophy Tropomyosin Nemaline myopathy Myotubulin Centronuclear myopathy Desmin Desmin storage myopathy LGMD, limb girdle muscular dystrophy. other dystrophinopathies, and the some of the limb girdle muscular dystrophies. In fact, it is now possible to iden-tify an array of myopathies using immunohistochemistry to study disease-related proteins. The nerve supply to muscle, including the intramuscu-lar nerve twigs and MEPs, cannot be adequately studied in routine samples. The anatomic location of nerve end-ings and endplates is variable, depending on the muscle selected. They may be restricted to a narrow band across the muscle, or they may be more widely distributed throughout the muscle tissue. Some investigators prefer to biopsy shorter muscles, maximizing the chance of finding the intramuscular nerves. The external intercostal muscle has been used for this reason. Many limb muscles have a single band of terminal motor innervation that corresponds to the so-called motor point. The motor point can be iden-tified with the use of an electrical stimulator. After the administration of local anesthesia and incision of the skin, the muscle is stimulated using a metallic electrode before any tissue is removed. The nerve endings can be located at sites where a single fascicle rather than the whole muscle contracts after stimulation with a very weak current. Once the innervation zone is established electrically, the biopsy is removed. Using a variety of techniques, different portions of the muscle innervation can be subsequently evaluated. Vital staining with methylene blue has been used to demonstrate the intramuscular nerve twigs as well as the endplates. This technique requires that the muscle be in-jected with a methylene blue solution before the muscle sample is actually taken. An undesirable complication of this technique is muscle pain, which many patients experi-ence during the injection of the dye. In order to preserve the staining of the nerve endings, the biopsy must be oxygen-ated for 1hour. This technique is obviously complicated and not recommended for most laboratories. A simpler butless elegant technique for the demonstration of nerve twigs is the staining of muscle with silver methods such as Bodi-an's stain. The post junctional portion of the endplate can be stained histochemically for acetylcholinesterase activity The reaction product is not restricted to the postjunctional membrane, and consequently this is a relatively crude method of studying endplates. More precise methods of studying endplates involve the use of a-bungarotoxin and freeze-fracture electron micros-copy. a-Bungarotoxin is derived from cobra venom and binds specifically with the actelycholine receptor. Immu-noperoxidase techniques using a-bungarotoxin allow direct ultrastructural visualization of the post junctional region of the MEP. With the use of freeze-fracture preparations, both the active zones of the PRS membrane and the AChRs of the POS membrane can be studied in greater detail. In certain rare disorders of the neuromuscular junction, freeze- fracture microscopy may be a useful ancillary diag-nostic tool. The nearly crystalline arrangement of filaments within muscle fibers renders them a suitable subject for x-ray dif-fraction studies. Diffractograms have provided considerable insight into the architecture and structure of the myofila-ments. A major advantage of x-ray diffraction is its applica-tion to living muscle cells. Recently, x-ray diffraction has been enhanced by the use of increasingly powerful x-ray sources and electronic signal detectors that have replaced photographic film. Reflection signals from a living muscle fiber can be adjusted to reveal equatorial reflections from the regular lateral spacing of the filaments or meridional reflections originating from the arrangement of subunits in the direction of the fiber axis, depending on the angle of the diffractogram and the camera light. Finally, morphometric analysis of muscle tissue is indi-cated in the event that normal or abnormal findings, such as variations in fiber diameters, are minimal and subtle. In the past, morphometry has been performed manually using an eyepiece micrometer, but this procedure is time-consuming and tedious. More recently, it has been possible to conduct sophisticated morphometric analysis electronically, using a computer-assisted image analyzer. Automated image analysis can be adapted for quantitative measurements on photographs of microscopic sections, but systems also exist for totally automated analysis of images taken directly from microscopic slides or other types of tissue preparations.