The rate of growth of the nail plate has been studied exten-sively. Normal nail growth varies between 0.1 and 1.12 mm per day, or 1.9 to 4.4 mm per month. This growth, however, is not the same in all fingers or toes. For example, fingernails grow faster than toenails. Whereas a normal fin-gernail grows out completely in approximately 6 months, a normal toenail takes 12 to 18 months to do the same, although nails grow faster when regenerating after avulsion. Several physiologic circumstances can cause variations in the nail growth. Nail growth is quicker in males, during the day than during the night, during pregnancy, in persons who bite their nails, and in summer or warm climates. Conversely, nails grow more slowly in females, during the night, in toes, in winter, after age 20, and during lactation. Nail growth is also altered in several diseases . Nails grow quicker with psoriasis, pity-riasis rubra pilaris, etretinate treatment, and hyperthyroidism; nails grow slower in cases of immobi-lization or paralysis, local ischemic conditions, cytostatic therapy, denutrition, hypothyroidism, and yellow nail syndrome. In the case of a sud-den decrease in nail growth, for example, in acute infections, a transverse band will appear afterward, depressed in the proximal line called Beau's line. However, patients with unilateral toenail onychomycosis did not support the Physiologic Increased Decreased Men Women Daytime Night Summer Winter Pregnancy First day of life Third digit First and fifth digits Right hand* Left hand* Youth Old age Nail biting AvulsionPathologic Increased Decreased Psoriasis Pityriasis rubra pilaris Hyperthyroidism A-V shunts Idiopathic onycholysis in women Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis Hyperpituitarism Morgagni-Stewart-Morel sd.Fever Poor nutrition Hypothyroidism Decreased blood supply Kwashiorkor Beau's lines Denervation/lmmobilization Acute infection Chronic disease Smoking Onychomycosis Yellow nail sd. Lichen planus Relapsing polychondritis Medications: methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclosporine, lithium, retinoids, sulfonamides, heparinBrittle nail sd. Medications: calcium, vitamin D, benoxaprofen, biotin, cysteine, oral contraceptives, L-dopa, fluconazole, itraconazole, terbinafine, etretinate *In a person's dominant right hand. hypothesis that slow nail growth rate is a predisposing factor for this onychomycosis. The absence of Kl and KI0 from healthy nail bed may also be related to the adherence of the overlying nail. In simple terms, the nail plate might be interpreted as the suprabasallayer of the nail bed, con-taining keratins not produced by the nail bed, but affording barrier function, or some other properties associated with K1, K10, and Ha 1. The presence of these overlying keratins might be responsible for the lack of a granular layer and associated absence of Kl and Kl O. In diseases such as ony-chomycosis and psoriasis, where nail plate adherence is lost, a granular layer forms alongside expression of Kl and KI0 The rate of growth of the nail plate is determined by the turnover rate of the matrix cells. Shortly after death, matrix cells do not incorporate tritiated thymidine in their nuclei; the cells appear to be incapable of DNA synthesis and cell division, and, therefore, the nail does not grow. Previ-ous reports of nail growth after death are, in fact, erroneous. Apparent growth, caused by severe postmortem drying and shrinking of the soft tissues around the nail plate, is what was observed. The question of where the nail plate is formed is still controversial. The first theories at the beginning of the century pointed toward a complete formation by the matrix. Years later, Lewis, however, concluded that the nail plate was the product of three different matrices on the basis of staining of the nail plate with a silver-pro-tein stain and the morphology of keratinizing cells. Lewis'shypothesis was supported by differential staining of the nail plate, by differential interference contrast microscopy, and by ultrastructural observation of keratohyalin granules in embryonic nail. Lewis's hypothesis, how-ever, has been extensively reviewed. Zaias and Alvarez used radioautography to show that the nail plate was formed exclusively by the matrix in normal conditions; Samman and Norton confirmed it by following the incor-poration of H-labeled glycine and thymidine in human toe-nails; and Caputo and Dadati reported that, ultrastruc-turally, the nail plate was a homogeneous structure with no evidence of formation from three different matrices. To add one final bit to the confusion, Samman suggests that although under normal conditions the nail plate is made exclusively by the matrix, in certain pathologic conditions, the nail bed adds a ventral nail to the undersurface of the nail plate. Finally, Kato published a case with an ectopic nail at the palmar tip, with a vertical growth. In this case, the proximal nail fold promotes upward growth of the nail plate, in the absence of a proper nail bed. Perrin et al. have clearly demonstrated that the ventral matrix is the main source of the nail plate. The coex-pression of hHb5 with K5 and K17 in the uppermost cell layers of the basal compartment and the lowermost layers of the keratogenous zone of the ventral matrix prompts us to designate this region, the prekeratogenous zone of the ven-tral matrix. The two alternating types of histology and keratin expression in the dorsal matrix identify this region as a tran-sitional zone between the eponychium and the apical matrix. In addition, the mixed scenario of hair and epithelial keratins, including demonstrable amounts of KI0, in superficial cells of the apical matrix, lends support to the notion that the dor-sal portion of the nail is generated by the apical matrix. However, some authors believe that the nail bed epi-thelium produces a significant 20% portion of the nail plate and thus, include the nail bed in the generative portion of the nail. Interestingly, indirect immunofluorescence studies in the fetal nail by means of pan-anti-type I and pan-anti-type II hair keratin antibodies revealed a posi-tive staining in a broad band of suprabasal cells of the nail bed epithelium. However, exclusion of hair keratins hHa 1, hHbS, hHbl, hHb6, and hHa4 from the adult nail bed epi-thelium clearly identifies the matrix as the sole origin of the nail plate. It has previously been speculated that a few so-called 'horn cells' may be added by the nail bed epithelium to the underside of the nail plate. Although our study confirmed the occurrence of clearly visible KS/l 7-positive nail bed cells in the lower nail plate, we believe that these cells represent sectioning artifacts. Our transverse nail sections, stained for either KSIl7 or hHbS, show that the boundary between the nail bed epithelium and the nail plate is extremely undulated and that the resulting narrow-spaced folds and ridges exhibit a distinctly varying height. Therefore, it is evident that already slight deviations from a vertical angle of section through the nail bed region may reveal KS-positive cells in the nail plate, which in reality stem from the tip of an adjacent epithelial fold of the bed epithelium. Collectively, these data emphasize that the nail bed epithelium does not actively contribute to the forma-tion of the nail plate. An important controversy is why nails grow out instead of up. Kligman postulated that the cul-de-sac of the proxi-mal nail groove forced the cells of the matrix to grow out. To confirm his theory he transplanted nail matrix to the forearm, producing a vertical cylinder of hard keratin that had histologic characteristics of the nail. Hashimoto et al. stated later that the long axis of matrix cells in embryonic nail was directed upward and distally. Another important question is why the nail bed accom-panies the nail plate in its growth. A well-known fact is that a hemorrhage, which occurs between the plate and bed, grows forward with the plate. If the plate merely moved over the bed, the blood would not move; therefore, the upper part of the bed must move out with the plate. Some authors, such as Krantz, Kligman, and Zaias, tried to study this phenomenon in an experimental way. Of all theories, the one by Zaias is most acceptable at present:He believes that the proximal nail bed moves out, either by pressure by advancing plate or because of trauma, but that the distal nail bed and hyponychium do not move. Similarly controversial is the existence of a thin dorsal nail plate which has been postulated on the basis of differential staining properties of the nail plate, a differential dis-tribution of phospholipid, sulfhydryl and disulfide groups, and ultrastructural observations. Moreover, the keratin pattern of the thin dorsal nail is different from that of the lower nail, in that in addition to hair keratins as a major constituent and the epithelial keratin pairs KS/KI4 and K6/KI6/KI7 as minor components, it also contained low amounts of Kl/I0. HANDLING AND PROCESSING OF THE NAil The major problem of the nail unit is the difficulty of tissue selection and the need for proper orientation of the speci-men. These problems are the reason for the small number of histologic studies. The first important point is how to take a biopsy of the nail unit. The best way of studying a biopsy of the nail is to ascertain that it includes the complete thickness of the nail unit (which means nail plate, bed, and subjacent dermis); these can be sectioned transversely. If a punch biopsy is taken, it should be done by boring firmly through the nail plate and into the underlying tissue to obtain a specimen with the plate attached. If one wishes to eliminate the nail plate before taking the biopsy, special care has to be taken about nail avulsion because if it has been avulsed without care, the epithelium of the bed or matrix may become separated and the undersurface may remain attached to the plate and distort the true histo-pathologic picture. The ideal biopsy technique for the nail is a longitudinal biopsy, which includes the hypo-nychium, the nail bed, and matrix with overlying plate, and the proximal nail fold and cuticle. The specimen may be taken from the center of the nail apparatus or from the lat-eral edge, or may be modified to provide elliptical excision of a tumor of the nail bed. The second point is the orientation of the specimen for cutting. In all cases, the surgeon should alert the patholo-gist on the submission form as to the way the specimen was obtained, whether a particular orientation is needed, and whether a piece of the nail plate is included. The third point is how to treat the specimen in the labo-ratory. If the nail plate is present in the specimen, it will be Dorsal nail plate Schematic diagram of nail growth. Intermediate nail plate Ventral nail plate too hard for ready cutting with a microtome unless some method of softening is used. A special fixative of 5% trichlo-roacetic acid and 10% formalin will leave the plate softer. Alternatively, the specimen can be placed in distilled water for a few hours before placing in formalin. Another helpful technique for softening the hard keratin of the nail plate was proposed by Luna: Fix specimen in 10% formalin for 24 hours. Place specimens in the following solution until com-pletely de-keratinized. Change the solution every 2 days for best results. Mercuric chloride 4.0 g Chromic acid 0.5 g Nitric acid, concentrated 10.0 mL Ethyl alcohol, 95% 50.0 mL Distilled water 200.0 mL Wash in running water for 3 hours. Dehydrate, clear, and impregnate with paraffin, or process as desired. With this technique, the preservation of the cytologic characteristics of the epithelial cells of the nail matrix and nail bed is not as good as with the previous one, but it is very helpful for softening the hardest nail specimens.