(Norms are recognized as such only through infractions. Functions are revealed only bytheir breakdown' - GEORGES CANGUILHELM LE NORMAL ET LE PATHOLOGIQUE The ends of contiguous bones together with their soft tissue components, including cartilage, ligaments, and synovium, constitute a functioning unit: The joint. There are three types of joints. The most common is the diarthrodial joint, which is a cavitated movable connecting unit between twoTHE ARTHRITIC JOINT 121 Alteration in Shape 122 TISSUE RESPONSE TO INJURY 122 Cartilage 122 Bone 124 Ligaments 127 Synovial Membrane 127 Synovial Fluid 128 REFERENCES 129 bones. (Hyaline cartilage covers the articulating surfaces of the diarthrodial joints, with the exception of the sternocla-vicular and temporomandibular joints, which are covered by fibrocartilage.) The second type is the amphiarthrodial joint, typified by the intervertebral disk and characterized by limited mobility. The third type is the fibrous synarthro-sis, such as the skull sutures, which are nonmovable joints and will not be discussed further. Diarthrodial Joint Histology makes more sense when we have an understand-ing of both the function and dysfunction (ie, the pathology) of an organ. In the diarthrodial joint normal func-tion is characterized by the maintenance of stability during use; freedom of the opposed articular surfaces to move pain-lessly over each other within the required range of motion; and an equitable distribution of load across joint tissues. Conversely clinical joint dysfunction is characterized by instability, loss of motion, maldistribution of load, and pain. The three interdependent aspects of normal joint func-tion depend on the shape of the joint, the mechanical properties of the extracellular matrices of the various tissues that compose the joint, and the integrity of the neuromuscular control. The Shape Perhaps the most obvious feature of any joint is the shape of its articulating surfaces. In general, one surface is convex fit between the acetabulum and femoral head. B. Lateral MRI of a normal knee shows the gross incongruity of the articular surfaces. This is partially corrected by the interposed menisci, which act as load-bearing structures. and the other concave. The convex side of the articulation usually has a larger surface than the concave side. These complementary shapes permit the normal range of motion, as well as providing stability and equitable loading during use. At first sight in some joints, the articular surfaces appear to fit exactly (eg, the hip and the ankle). However, in other joints (eg, the knee and finger joints), it is readily apparent that the surfaces are incongru-ent. In a movable joint, congruence in all positions of the joint would necessitate that all joint surfaces were either perfectly spherical or cylindrical, which obviously they are not. Therefore, no joint can be congruent in all positions (though in every joint there is usually a position in which it ismost congruent). In some joints, of which the knee is a notable example, the gross incongruencies of the opposed surfaces are partially Acompensated for by the interposed, pliable intra-articular fibrocartilaginous menisci. The menisci constitute an important component contributing to joint morphology and function and cannot be removed or damaged without sig-nificant consequences. (The same is true of the labrum of the hip joint, which may be regarded as an extension of the articular surface of the acetabulum.) In many joints, perhaps most, the initial contact between the opposed articular surfaces seems to be at the periphery of the joint. However, because the tissues that make up the articulating surfaces (particularly the cartilage but also the bone) undergo elastic deformation when loaded, the sur-faces come into increasing contact as the load increases, thereby distributing the load more equitably. The incongruence of the surfaces, the deformation of the joint space under load, and the movement of the joint provide for the circulation and mixing of the synovial fluid, for synovial fluid to the joint space. B. Increased load. With increasing load, deformation of the bone and cartilage allow increased contact of the cartilage surfaces and an equitable distribution of the load. Cycli-cal loading permits circulation ofthe synovial fluid in the joint and between the articular surfaces to provide for the metabolic needs of the cartilage. which, because the articular cartilage has no blood supply, are essential to the metabolism of the chondrocytes. The Mechanical Properties of the Extracellular Matrices In1743, William Hunter noted that: The articulating cartilages are most happily contrived to all purposes of motion in those parts. By their uniform surface, they move upon one another with ease; by their soft, smooth and slippery surface, mutual abrasion is prevented; by their flexibility, the contiguous surfaces are constantly adapted to each other and the friction diffused equally over the whole; by their elasticity, the violence of any shock, which may happen in running, jumping, etc. is broken and gradually spent; which must have been extremely pernicious, if the hard surfaces of bones had been immediately contiguous. These mechanical properties of articular cartilage (as of all other connective tissues) are determined by the extracel-lular matrices. Ineach of the different connective tissues (bone, carti-lage, ligament, etc.), as well as in each particular anatomic structure, the matrices have a unique composition and structural organization that provide for mechanical function at that locus. Disturbances in the structure and/or composi-tion of the extracellular matrix of articular cartilage, follow-ing trauma, may result in joint dysfunction, and, since the joint also includes the bone beneath the cartilage as well as the capsule and ligaments, alterations in the mechani-cal properties of bone or disruption of the ligaments could have equally disastrous effects on joint function. Clearly some knowledge of the matrix components is necessary to an understanding of connective tissue diseases. The connective tissue matrices are synthesized and to some extent broken down by their intrinsic cells (eg, fibro-blasts, osteoblasts, osteoclasts, chondrocytes). Inmain-taining the physicochemical and mechanical properties of tissues, the metabolism of these cells must be subject to highly sensitive feedback systems involving both local and systemic factors. Collagen fibers, the principal extracellular component of connective tissues, are made up of bundles of fibrils, which in turn, are composed of stacked molecules formed from polypeptide chains arranged in a helical pattern. How-ever, there are also non-fiber-forming collagens that have varying functions, such as acting as binding sites for other matrix components or facilitating calcifi-cation. Twenty-nine different types of collagen molecules are now known, and these vary both in size and configuration. Type I collagen is both the most common form of col-lagen and the major form of collagen found in skin, fascia, tendon, ligaments, and bone. Articular hyaline cartilage has a unique type of collagen, type II, which is structurally char-acterized by three triple helical ce-I chains. The type II fibrillar network gives articular cartilage its tensile strength and, together with the proteoglycans, is essential for maintaining the tissues volume and shape.The fibrillar collagens provide tensile strength. How-ever, connective tissues are also subjected to compression. Inbone, the compressive load is resisted by hydroxyapatite. Incartilage, a mucoid filler between the collagen fibers pro-vides the compressive strength of the tissue, as well as its viscoelastic properties. This filler is composed of large nega-tively charged macromolecular PG aggregates. PGs are a group of heterogeneous molecules, consisting of protein chains and attached carbohydrates, which have a sticky gel-like quality. The major PG in cartilage is aggrecan, containing a protein core of Mr 2.IS x105to which car-bohydrate side chains are attached. The core protein, which contains three globular domains, interacts with hyaluronic acid, and this interac-tion is stabilized by link protein. As many as 200 aggrecan molecules bind to one hyaluronic acid chain to form an aggregate. The highly charged PG molecules attract water and may swell considerably. However, within the cartilage, the expansion of the PGs is restricted by the collagen network to approximately 20% of the maximum possible; this creates a swelling pressure within cartilage tissue. When cartilage is loaded, some water is extruded and PGs are further com-pressed. Removal of the load permits the imbibing of water into the tissue, together with essential nutrients, until the swelling pressure of the PGs is again balanced by the ten-sile resistance of the collagen network. Aggrecan shows an age-related decrease in overall size and enrichment in keratan sulfate relative to chondroitin sulfate, and these changes may relate to the observed age-dependent change in the stiffness and water content of the cartilage. Inaddition to aggrecan, the extracellular matrix of car-tilage contains many noncollagenous proteins and PGs, whose precise functions are only just beginning to be under-stood. These molecules may serve a structural or regulatory role-and in some cases may do both-because degradation products of some of the structural molecules are known to influence the chondrocyte. The recognition of genetic disor-ders in which synthesis of the matrix molecules is perturbed has aided greatly in our understanding of their functional role, but the reason for many site- and age-related restric-tions in expression remains unclear. This is an area where there is still a wealth of information to be mined. Ina mature joint, cyclic hydrostatic fluid pressure through the entire cartilage thickness is comparable in magnitude to the applied joint pressure. Prolonged physical activity can cause the total cartilage thickness to decrease about S%, although the consolidation strains vary markedly in the superficial, transitional, and radial zones. For example, the superficial zone can experience significant fluid exuda-tion and consolidation in the range of 60%, while the radial zone experiences relatively little fluid flow and consolidation. The topologic variation in the microscopic appear-ance and quantitative biochemistry of articular cartilage is tial fibers that make up the annulus fibrosus and the well-demarcated bulging central mass of the nucleus pulposus. Note also the decreasing width of the annulus from anterior Itop) to posterior Ibottom). B.In this desiccated specimen of the lower lumbar spine, the alternating oblique orientation ofthe collagen fibers in the annulus can be appreciated. effected by the local mechanical loading of chondrocytes in the different zones. Patterns of stress, strain, and fluid flow created in the joint result in spatial and temporal changes in the rates of synthesis and degradation of matrix proteins. When viewed over the course of a lifetime, even subtle dif-ferences in these cellular processes may be expected to affect the micro- and macromorphology of articular cartilage. Capsular, Pericapsular Tissues, and Muscular Control Any consideration of functional joint anatomy must include the capsule of the joint with its synovial lining; the liga-mentous conjoining of the articulating surfaces; and the neuromuscular control of joint motion. Through the per-ception of touch, temperature, pain, and position, sensory feedbacks monitor our movements. Correct joint function is thus dependent on intact ligaments, muscles, and nerves. As recognized by Charcot a breakdown of neuromuscular coordination can lead to profound arthritis. Amphiarthrodial Joint The intervertebral disk is a fibrocartilaginous complex that forms the articulation between the vertebral bodies and it can be divided into two components: The outermost fibrous ring and the innermost gelatinous core. It contributes both to the mobility and stability of the spine as well as to the transmission of load. The annulus, when viewed from above, is seen to con-tain fibrous tissue layers arranged in concentric circles. Each layer extends obliquely from vertebral body to vertebral body, with the fibers of one layer running in a direction opposite to that of the adjacent layer. This arrangement of alternat-ing oblique layers provides for motion that is universal in direction (rotation, flexion, and extension but restricted in degree). The fibers of the annulus are attached by Sharp ey's fibers to the bony endplates of the adjacent vertebral bodies. Thefibrous lamellae are stronger and more numerous in the anterior and lateral aspects of the disk than in the posterior aspect, where they are sparser and thinner. The anterior annulus is therefore almost twice the thickness of the pos-terior annulus. This variation probably reflects the additional protection offered by the posterior elements of the vertebral bodies. As a result of the variation in thickness of the annulus, the nucleus pulposus typically occupies an eccentric position within the disk space, being closer to the posterior margin. The tissue of the nucleus is separated from that of the bone above and below by a clearly defined layer of hyaline cartilage which extends to the inner margins of the insertion of the annulus. On microscopic examination, the nucleus pulposus shows both chondrocytes and a varying number of stellate and fusiform cells suspended in a loose fibromyxoid matrix rich in PGs. the bone Ibottom) by a dense layer of hyaline cartilage, as demon-strated in this photomicrograph IH&E stain, x4 objective). young healthy cartilage. B.For comparison, the tibial plateau of a 50-year-old. The cartilage is smooth and healthy in appearance but is more yellowish in color and opaque in quality than that of the 16-year-old. Because no blood vessels are present in most of the adult disk tissue, nutrients must travel by diffusion from capillary beds at the disk margins. A restricted flow of nutri-ents to the nucleus and inner annulus may contribute to disk degeneration in the adult. It should be noted that disk height, in general, is not the same in all segments of the spine, the cervical and thoracic disks being flatter than those of the lumbar region. There is also a variation in disk height from front to back, relative to the curvature of the spine. With age, the disk gets thinner as a result of age-related dehydration of the disk.