External Ear Abnormalities of the external ear include those associated with first and second branchial arch syndromes. The first and second branchial arch syndromes include otologic and nonotologic abnormalities. The otologic manifestations or abnormalities include malformed or absent external ears, atretic external auditory canal, and impaired hearing. The nonotologic abnormalities include asymmetric facies, abnor-malities of the temporomandibular joint, neuromuscularabnormalities and associated abnormalities of the cardiovas-cular, renal and central nervous systems. Goldenhar's syn-drome, also known as oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia, is first and second branchial arch syndromes characterized by ear tags, preauricular pits and fissures, epidermoids, lipoder-moids, and vertebral column abnormalities. Ear abnor-malities can also be seen in association with other abnormal-ities, including Down syndrome. Cryptotia is a rare anomaly in which the superior portion of the auricle is buried in the scalp. Microtia represents gross hypoplasia of the pinna with a blind or absent external audi-tory canal. Microtia is typically bilateral although the degree of hypoplasia may differ on the two sides. Accessory tragi, also referred to as accessory or supernumerary ears, acces-sory auricle, or polyotia, appear at birth, may be solitary or multiple, unilateral or bilateral, sessile or pedunculated, soft or cartilaginous, skin-covered nodules or papules. They are located on the skin surface often anterior to the auricle and may clinically be mistaken for a papilloma. Histologically, accessory tragi recapitulate the normal external auricle and include skin, cutaneous adnexal structures, and a central core of cartilage. Accessory tragi are thought to be related to second branchial arch anomalies. Accessory tragi may occur independent of other congenital anomalies but may occur in association with cleft palate or lip, mandibular hypoplasia, or in association with other anomalies such as Goldenhar's syndrome. In adults, diagonal earlobe crease has been associated with coronary artery disease and has been referred to as Frank's sign. The crease runs diagonally backward and downward across the lateral surface of the earlobe from the external meatus. Depending on the extent and depth of the crease, three grades have been assigned B A, B. Individual with cryptotia, a rare anomaly in which the superior portion of the auricle is buried in the scalp. a deep crease along 100% of the earlobe. This person had similar ear-lobe crease on the opposite ear. Bilateral grades 2 and 3 creases are associated with a significantly higher risk of death from atherosclerosis and myocardial infarction. with grade 1 being the least obvious appearing crease, grade 2 including a superficial crease across 100% of the earlobe or a deep crease across 50% of the earlobe, and grade 3 represented by a deep crease along 100% of the earlobe. Bilateral grades 2 and 3 creases are associated with a signifi-cantly higher risk of death from atherosclerosis and myocar-dial infarction.