Articular Cartilage Morphology The articular ends of the bones are covered by hyaline cartilage, which is a nerveless, bloodless, firm, and yet pliable tissue. Hyaline cartilage deforms under pressure but recovers its original shape on removal of pressure. In growing chil-dren, cartilage is the most obvious precursor of the bony skele-ton, and it is the means by which the bones increase in length by the mechanism of endochondral ossification through the medium of the cartilaginous growth plate. In young people, hyaline cartilage is translucent and bluish-white; in older individuals, it is opaque and slightly yellowish. This change in the appear-ance of the articular cartilage with advancing age is also seen in other connective tissues and is probably related to a number of factors, including dehydration of the tissues, increased numbers of cross linkages in the collagen, and the possible accumulation of lipofuscin pigment. On microscopic examination, articular cartilage is characterized by its abundant glassy extracel-lular matrix with isolated, relatively sparse cells locatedin well-defined spaces. It is usu-ally described as having four layers: Superficial, intermediate, deep, and calcified. In the superficial layer, the cells are flat. In the intermediate zone, the cells have a tendency to form radial groups that appar-ently follow the pattern of collagen disposition. In the deep zone, the cells are hypertrophied; and in the calcified zone, the cells are nonviable and the matrix is heavily calcified. from the femoral condyle of a middle-aged individual jH&E stain, x4 objective). the organization of the articular surface seen on is shown diagrammatically. This distribution of the collagen arcades described by Benninghoff has been drawn in at the top of the figure. Noncalcified articu-lar cartilage has been removed to reveal the surface of the tidemark. The small "volcanic" structures represent the location of the cells in the calcification front. The vessels that penetrate the calcification car-tilage are seen just beneath the calcification front. A dissection shows the vessels when the cartilage has been pared away, and a scanning elec-tron photomicrograph shows the section from which the diagram was reconstructed. lar cartilage had been digested away. The small dots represent chondrocytes embedded in the mineralization front. The larger voids result from underlying vessels close to the tidemark. The cracks are prepara-tion artifact. B. The appearance of chondrocytes embedded in this surface is shown in a cross sectional image of an H&E section, photomicrographed using polarized light. The same sample is shown in Cas in a transmission electron and in 0 as a higher power scanning image. It is hypothesized that this layer of embed-ded chondrocytes regulates the rate of active calcification at the tidemark. Within the mineralized bone matrix, the osteocytes are connected with one another by means of cytoplasmic pro-cesses; however, no such syncytial arrangement is present within the cartilage. The chondrocytes are dependent upon the diffusion of solutes through the extracellular matrix for their metabolism. Since the matrix of the deep calcified zone of the articular cartilage effectively blocks the passage of solutes from the subchondral bone, the articular carti-lage is thus dependent on the diffusion of nutrients and the exchange of metabolites from the synovial fluid through the articular surface. In the late nineteenth century, Hultkranz demon-strated that a precisely organized fibrous system within nor-mal articular cartilage is readily demonstrable by the simple expedient of pricking the articular surface with a pin. When this is done, a split results; if the pricking is repeated all over the surface, a pattern of split lines is revealed that is constant for each joint from individual to individual. When the superficial layer of the cartilage is pared away and the exposed surface pricked, only small round holes appear instead of fissures. Ifthe cut edge of the cartilage is pricked, a vertical split line is produced, and this occurs in all planes of section. Ifthe fissures reflect the internal fiber arrangement of the cartilage, then at the artic-ular surface the fibers run parallel to the surface and in the general direction of the split line, and in the deeper layers of the cartilage the fibers are predominantly vertical. A combination of polarizing microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, and scanning electron microscopy has confirmed that the principal orientation of collagen fibers in articular cartilage is vertical through most of its thickness and horizontal at the surface. Electron microscopic studies have shown that, in the surface layer of normal articular cartilage, the collagen fibers are closely packed, of fine diameter, and mostly ori-ented parallel to the joint surface. The collagen content of from three different individuals after the surfaces have been pricked with a pin whose tip had been dipped in India ink. Note the resulting pattern of split lines, which is unique for each joint in the body. Note that the pattern is similar from individual to individual. Photograph of a portion of articular cartilage that has been sectioned vertically to show the cut edge and the underlying bone. The direction of pin pricks made on the surface can be seen; additional pin pricks have been made on the cut edge, all of which resulted in vertical splits. cartilage progressively diminishes from the superficial to the deep layer. In deep layers, collagen fibers are more widely separated, thicker in diameter, and are vertically aligned in such a fashion as to form a web of arch-shaped structures. The collagen fibers are continuous with those in the calcified layer of cartilage but not with under-lying subchondral bone. The morphology of the collagen-fibril network influences and reflects the local stresses and strains in the articular cartilage. The menisci of the knee are composed mainly of colla-gen, although some PG is also present. Microscopic exam-ination of carefully oriented sections has shown that the principal orientation of the collagen fibers in the menisci is circumferential to withstand the circumferential tension within the meniscus during normal loading of the knee joint. The few small radially disposed fibers probably act as collagen fibers can be visualized as blue, the deeper collagen fibers [which are perpendicular) as yellow. Collagen cannot be seen in the intermediate area because the fibers in this zone are decussating as in the model of Benninghoff's arcade shown in jx4 objective). layer demonstrates thin closely packed and oriented fibers. B. Transmission electron micrograph, taken from tissue obtained from the mid-zone of the cartilage and cut randomly, demonstrates variable fiber thickness and more widely separated fibers than are seen at the surface. ties to resist any longitudinal splitting of the menisci that might result from undue compression. The precise organization of collagen in the articular car-tilage, in the annulus of the intervertebral disc, and in the menisci is also present in all the connective tissues of the body and serves a mechanical function in all of these locations. Since the distribution of PCs in the cartilage matrix is also related to the local mechanical requirements it varies quantitatively and possibly qualitatively from joint to joint, as well as geographically within a single articular surface; it also varies as a function of age. (In general, PC distribution is more even in children than in adults.) The surface lay-ers of the cartilage contain much less PC than the deeperlayers. In the deeper layers, there is a higher concentration of staining with safranin 0 and methylene blue around the cells than between the cells (the intercellular matrix). Besides the PC aggregates, the articular cartilage con-tains other extracellular matrix proteins. Chondrocalcin is a protein probably involved in the cal-cification process. Anchorin is a protein on the surface of chondrocytes involved in binding of these cells to extracellular matrix components, possibly transmit-ting altered stress in type II fibers to chondrocytes. Fibro-nectin, thrombomodulin, and cartilage oligomeric high Mr matrix protein are all found in cartilage, but their pre-cise functions are not yet established. the fibers are circumferentially distributed to resist the tension generated in the meniscus when the knee is under compressive load. The radially distributed fibers are most obvious on the tibial surface of the meniscus. (Modified from: Bullough PG, Munuera L, Murphy J,et al. The strength of the menisci of the knee as it relates to their fine structure. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1970;52:564-567, with permission). B. Photomicrograph of a cross section of meniscus seen with polarized light. The tibial surface is the bottom edge where most of the fibers are radially arranged. around the chondrocytes in the deep part of the noncalcified cartilage. This represents staining of the proteoglycan. There is much less stain-ing in the interterritorial matrix than around the cell. Even less staining is seen in the calcified cartilage. In histologic sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin, the junction between the calcified cartilage and the noncalcified cartilage is marked by a basophilic line known as the tidemark. This basophilic line is not seen in the developing skeleton but is clearly visible in the adult. In older individuals, replication of the tidemark is usually evident, and in osteoarthritic joints rep-lication may be marked. Mechanical failure in the deep cartilage rarely, if ever, gives rise to separation at the bone cartilage interface. However, when failure occurs, it is often seen as a horizontal cleft at the tidemark, pre-sumably because of the considerable change in the rigidity of the cartilage at this junction. At its base, adult articular cartilage is bordered by the subchondral bone plate, and the calcified cartilage tissue is keyed into the irregular sur-face of the underlying bone, somewhat like a jigsaw puzzle. Photomicrograph of the deep and calcified layers of the articular cartilage. The deep layer is separated from the calcified layer by a basophilic line referred to as the "tidemark," which represents the mineralizing front. Because the cartilage adjacent to the bone is calcified and has a rigidity similar to that of bone, the keying is rigid. The insertions of ligaments and tendons into the bone are also calcified, and their adhesion is effected by a simi-lar keying process. Because the insertions of ligament and tendons into the bone are generally studied anatomically in dry bone specimens, the bone markings we see are in fact the calcified portion of the ligament or tendon. Because the sites of such insertions are approximately the same from individual to individual, there is a tendency to think of them as static structures. However, since in the child growth is taking place, and in the adult bone turnover is taking place continuously, it follows that the insertions of ligaments and tendons must participate in this dynamic process. (Our knowledge of anatomy is for the most part mineralization front is almost certainly under cellular control; here, a chondrocyte is seen caught up in the tidemark. B.ln most areas of normal cartilage, only one tidemark is observed. How-ever, in an early stage of osteoarthritis, seen here, multiple tidemarks indicating rapid advance of the mineral-ization front can often be seen. irregularity ofthe interface between the subchondral bone and the over-lying calcified cartilage is obvious. The functional keying of the bone and cartilage depends on the two tissues having equal rigidity.based upon the dissection of the dead; but, for morphology to be understood, time must be put into the equation. Life is characterized by continuous growth and change.) The chondrocytes embedded in the cartilage matrix are responsible for synthesis and maintenance of the extracellu-lar tissue. The chondrocytes vary in size, shape, and number per unit volume of tissue, both from the superficial to the deep layers and in different anatomic locations . 18). Generally, cells at the cartilage surface are flatter, smaller, and orientated parallel with the cartilage surface. They also have a greater density than the cells deeper in the matrix. In the middle zones, chondrocytes are more spherical and arranged in columns. This vertical arrange-ment of the chondrocytes probably reflects the organized arrangement of collagen fibers in cartilage but it also sug-gests the possibility of movement of chondrocytes within the matrix substance as the highly organized arrangement ance of chondrocytes at the surface. mid-zone, and deep-zone of articular cartilage. Atthe surface, the cells typically show more cell processes on the inferior surface. The Golgi and endoplas-mic reticulum are less well developed than in the mid-zone. In the deep zone, the cells are degenerate, with disaggregated chromatin in the nucleus and vacuolization and fragmentation of the cytoplasm. of collagen fibers are being laid down. (An analogy would be the precise organization of a spider's web that necessitates the movement of the spider.) (An interesting ultrastructural feature of chondrocytes is a nonmotile monocilium, which may have a mechano-transductory function in regulation of matrix synthesis. This monocilium has been more frequently observed in young cartilage and reactive or reparative cartilage.) The chondrocytes of articular cartilage are encased in a specialized layer of matrix distinctly different from the bulk of extracellular matrix. This layer is rich in PGs, has some hyaluronic acid, and contains relatively little collagen. Around this paucicollagenous layer is a basketlike structure composed of cross-linked fibrillar type VI collagen encapsu-lating the cell or sometimes groups of cells; this provides a protective framework and helps maintain equal hydrostatic pressure around the cells. In chondrocytes, mitochondria are sparse-probably as a result of their comparatively low rates of oxygen consump-tion. Cells in the deeper uncalcified zone have the most prominent endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, indicating active protein synthesis as well as sulfation of PG carbohydrate side chains. The cell membrane shows numer-ous short, as well as some longer, branched cytoplasmic processes, but they make no connection with the processes of other chondrocytes. In the extracellular matrix adjacent to the chondrocytes that lie above the tidemark, as in the hypertrophic zone of the growth plate, small membrane-bound vesicles are visible. These have been thought to play a role in the calcification of cartilage matrix. In addition to hyaline cartilage, of which articular carti-lage is composed, two other forms of cartilage can be histo-logically recognized. Fibrocartilage is a tissue in which the matrix contains PG aggregates together with a high propor-tion of type I collagen, the fibers of which are usually vis-ible by transmitted light microscopy. Fibrocartilage may be found in the menisci of the knee, in the annulus fibrosus, at the insertions of ligaments and tendons into the bone, and on the inner side of tendons as they angle around pulleys. In all of these locations, the structures are subjected to compressive forces as well as tension. The second type of nonhyaline cartilage, elastic car-tilage, contains a high proportion of elastin in the matrix and is found in the ligamentum flavum, external ear, and epiglottis. Compared to collagen, elastin has much greater elasticity; this is particularly important in the yellow ligaments, of the spinal canal, which make possible the flexion of the vertebral column. Both the fibrocartilage and elastic cartilage incorpo-rate the term "cartilage" because the cells are rounded and lie in lacunae, which gives them, microscopically, a super-ficial resemblance to the cells of hyaline cartilage. How-ever, the mechanical functions of these tissues are very different from those of hyaline cartilage. Hyaline cartilage is mainly subjected to and resists compressive forces, whereas both fibrocartilage and elastic cartilage function Photomicrograph of ear cartilage. Although the cells resemble those seen in hyaline cartilage, the matrix contains many elastic fibers that appear red in this section (phloxine and tartrazine stain, x25 objective). principally as resisters of tension, albeit with some ele-ment of compression. Cartilage Turnover and Articular Remodeling Wolff's law states that both bone density and bone architec-ture correlate with the magnitude and direction of applied load. At the articular end of a bone, this implies that the subchondral bone trabeculae, which provide for the shape of the joint, must also undergo a self-regulated modeling that maintains optimal load distribution across the joint surface. In other words, the shape of bones, including their articular ends, reflects a dynamic state that incorporates a feedback dependent on mechanical stress. Endochondral ossification is an important mechanism for both bone growth and modeling. This is exemplified in the epiphyseal growth plate where calcified cartilage is invaded by blood vessels from the metaphyseal bone and is then replaced by bone tissue synthesized by osteoblasts lying close to the blood vessels. Studies of adult articular joints have shown that replacement of the calcified layer of articular car-tilage by bone tissue involves a similar process. Blood vessels from the subarticular bone penetrate the calcified cartilage, and new bone is laid down alongside the channels created by this process; thus throughout life the calcified cartilage is slowly replaced by new subarticular bone. Replacement of the calcified layer of cartilage by bone might be expected to result in thinning and eventual dis-appearance of the calcified cartilage. However, histologic study of articular cartilage from subjects of various ages shows that the calcified cartilage remains much the same thickness throughout life. This is because the calcification front continues to advance into the noncalci-fied cartilage at a slow rate, which is in equilibrium with the rate of absorption of the calcified cartilage from the subarticular bone. Since the thickness of the articu-lar cartilage does not significantly change during life, it can have extended into the calcified layer of cartilage. Around the circum-ference of each of these vessels, a thin layer of lamellar bone can be appreciated. By means of continuing endochondral ossification, the articular bone end is continuously modeled IH&E stain, x10objective).be postulated that articular cartilage is not a static tissue, as it was long believed to be. The extracellular matrix and the chondrocytes are being replaced throughout life; and, through these mechanisms, the joint undergoes continuous modeling. It indicates that programmed cell death (apopto-sis) plays an important role in this process in a similar way to what Mitrovic has demonstrated in joint formation during limb development. Heterogeneity of articular cartilage, including mor-phologic, biochemical, and biomechanical variations, can be observed within different regions of a normal weight-bearing joint. Considerable variation in cartilage thick-ness over an articular surface is present in most joints. A variation in stiffness in different areas of the femoral head has been related both to PC content and to the amount of water held by the tissue. The stiffness of the cartilage is the main factor that determines stress in the tissue and, together with the thickness of the cartilage, has the largest A B cus, as compared with that not covered by the meniscus. A. In the covered area, the surface is smooth, and on the surface there is an amorphous electron-dense layer; the chondrocytes are flattened. With respect to lipid, there is an increased intracellular accumulation in all three layers. Increased accumulation of extracellular lipid is noted at the surface, and there are increased numbers of extracellular matrix vesicles in the deep zone. In electron microscopy sections, collagen appears as randomly oriented fibers of vary-ing diameter but with thicker mean diameter than seen in B; there is regular binding of proteoglycan to the collagen fibrils; and the concentration of proteoglycans per wet weight is increased. The tidemark is irregular. B. In the uncovered area, the surface is irregular, there is a detached electron-dense layer, and the chondrocytes are rounded. The concentration of water per unit volume is increased. Collagen appears in wavy aggregated bundles with thinner mean diameters that vary but little from each other, and binding of proteoglycan to the collagen fibrils is ill defined. Proteoglycan can be extracted more easily from the cartilage matrix. The tidemark is smooth. In both the covered and the uncovered areas, the cell size is the same histologically, and there is the same amount of DNA per dry weight of cartilage tissue.Ilvlodified from: Bullough PG, Yawitz PS, Tafra L, et al. Topographical variations in the morphology and biochemistry of adult canine tibial plateau articular cartilage. JOrthop Res 1985;3:1-16, with permission.) effect on the stress in the calcified cartilage and underlying cancellous bone. An example of the normal geographic variation in artic-ular cartilage can be readily observed in the tibial plateau, both of humans as well as of other animals. There are dis-tinct morphologic differences between the articular carti-lage which is covered by the meniscus and that which is not. These differences consist of a rough surface and soft matrix in the thicker uncovered area as compared to the thinner smooth, firm cartilage tissue that is covered by the meniscus. In adult human knee joints at autopsy, it has been found that articular cartilage that was not covered by meniscus always showed matrix softening and superficial fibrillation. The mor-phologic and biochemical findings in these two distinct articular areas as studied in the adult dog are summarized in l. It is postulated that these naturally occurring variations in matrix structure and mechanical properties are related to joint loading. In the normally functioning knee, load is transmitted through the meniscus and onto the tibial car-tilage underlying the meniscus, whereas the exposed car-tilage, that which is not covered by the meniscus, remains relatively unloaded. Similar areas of possible disuse atrophy have been described around the rim of the radial head, in the roof of the acetabulum, and on the perifoveal and infer-omedial aspects of the femoral head. The extracellular matrix of the cartilage and of the other connective tissues is synthesized by their intrinsic cells under the control of both local and systemic factors. Both in vivo and in vitro studies have demonstrated that changes in the immedi-ate environment of the joint lead to alterations of the car-tilage matrix. Thus, immobilization or unloading of a joint results in decreased synthesis of glycosaminoglycans. Conversely, exercise appears to increase synthesis. These experimentally induced variations are in agreement with naturally observed topographic variations in joints that have been ascribed to normally occurring patterns of joint loading. In general, it seems that low levels of mechanical stress are associated with enhanced catabolic activity, whereas stress within the physi-ologic range is associated with more anabolic activity. Under conditions of supraphysiologic stress the chondrocytes are unable to adapt. In other words, there is a window of physi-ologic stress above or below which the chondrocytes cannot maintain an adequate functional matrix. Although a number of factors have been implicated in the transduction of mechanical stimuli to metabolic events, the exact mechanism still remains unclear. Histomorphogenesis of Articular Cartilage Recent studies suggest that the histomorphogenesis of articular cartilage is regulated during skeletal development by the intermittent forces and motions acting at the site of diarthrodial joints. A key feature in this development is the formation of the superficial, transitional, and radial zonesthrough the cartilage thickness. The histomorphologic and mechanical characteristics of these zones have been corre-lated with the distribution of pressures, deformations, and pressure-induced fluid flow created in vivo. However, unlike muscle and bone, the thickness of articular cartilage may not entirely depend upon mechanical stimulation. Synovial Membrane The synovial membrane lines the inner surface of the joint capsule and all other intra-articular structures, with the exception of articular cartilage and the meniscus. In addi-tion to lining the joints, synovial membrane lines the sub-cutaneous and sub tendinous sacs known as bursae, which permit freedom of movement over a limited range for the structures adjacent to the bursae, as well as the sheaths that form around tendons wherever they pass under ligamentous bands or through osseofibrous tunnels. Synovial membrane consists of two components. The first of these is the cellular lining bounding the joint space. This surface is smooth, moist, and glistening, with a few small villi and fringelike folds. The second compo-nent is a subintimal, supportive, or backing layer. Along the edge facing the synovial cavity, microscopic examination of synovial membrane reveals a single row or sometimes mul-tiple rows of closely packed cells with large elliptical nuclei. Beneath the surface layer in the subintima, there is vascularized fibroadipose tissue that contains some histiocytes and mast cells. Electron microscopic studies have revealed two principal types of synovial lining cells, designated by Barland as Types A and B. (Many cells have features of both types and have been called intermediate.) The less common cell has many of the features of a macrophage, and there is good evidence that it is structurally adapted for phagocytic func-tions. The more common Type B cells are richly endowed with rough endoplasmic reticulum, contain Golgi systems, and often show pinocytotic vesicles. Normal synovial intima contains 25% Type A and 75% Type B cells. fibrous tissue varies depending on the joint and the location within the joint. white light. B.Polarized light. The portion of the ligament that interfaces with the bone is calcified, and the edge of the calcified portion of the ligament is marked by a basophilic line that represents the mineralization front. Note the similarity with the bone cartilage interface illustrated in . C.A higher powered view to demonstrate the rounded cells lying in lacunae, which are seen atthe insertion site of both ligaments and tendons (fibrocartilaginous meta-plasia). The red staining in the matrix indicates the presence of proteoglycans (sat-ranin 0 stain, x25objective).The synovial membrane has three principal functions: Secretion of synovial fluid hyaluronate; phagocytosis of waste material derived from the various components of the joint; and regulation of the movement of solutes, electrolytes, and proteins from the capillaries into the synovial fluid, thus providing for the metabolic requirement of the joint chondrocytes and possi-bly also providing a regulatory mechanism for maintenance of the matrix through the role of various mediators. Ligaments and Tendons Ligaments, which are structures that join together two adja-cent bones, are formed mainly of collagen. The arrange-ment of the collagen bundles within a particular ligament I : .:~; I ", '-cdepends on the required movements within the joint; and, because these movements are complex, the arrangement of the collagen bundles is similarly complex. The collagen fibers of the ligament are calcified where they enter the bone, and the calcified portion of the ligament interdigi-tates and locks onto the underlying bone in the same way as the calcified cartilage. Tendons are specialized connective tissue structures that enable muscles to concentrate or extend their action. The Achilles tendon is a good example of a tendon that con-centrates the power of several bulky muscles to one lim-ited area of insertion into the bone. The long tendons of the hands and feet exemplify the function of extending the effect of distant muscles. Where the tendon inserts into the dense parallel collagen bundles characteristic of tendon. bone it is calcified and just adjacent to the calcified por-tion of the ligament, the extracellular matrix of the ligament will be found to contain some PG and, in association with this finding, the cells will be found to be contained within lacunae-like chondrocytes. The reason for this is that generally tendons enter the bone at an acute angle; for this reason, a shear force acts on the ligament at its insertion and the normal tension in the ligament is complicated by an added compressive force. Many muscles have no obvious tendinous insertions; for example the paraverte-bral and the gluteal muscles have short fan-shaped fibrous insertions, that insert into the periosteum or aponeuroses and which hardly justify their description as tendons. The majority of cells within normal tendons are rela-tively inactive fibrocytes scattered in a sparse longitudinal pattern between the collagen bundles. There is a slight gradient in the cell population, the proximal (mus-cular) portion of the tendon being more cellular than its distal insertion. Wherever a tendon turns a corner, or has to bend in association with neighboring joints, it is restrained under a pulley, or retinacular system, and is lubricated in this region by means of a synovial sheath. The surfaces of the flexor tendons of the hand which glide within a synovial sheath are covered by a single layer of synovial cells and a similar layer covers the parietal surface of the fibrous tendon sheath (the epi-tenon). In the palm of the hand the tendons are covered by a fine vascular adventitia nourished by vessels from the deep palmar arch. The feeding arteries to the tendons of the hands and feet, both the vessels in the vinculae, and the vessels in the palmar or plantar paratenon are long, coiled vessels that can stretch as the tendons move. (The flexor tendons may glide some 6 ernbetween full flexion and full extension.) In contrast to the sparse blood supply, the sensory nerve supply to tendons is relatively abundant, the nerve fibers terminating either in free ramifications (which maybe somewhat elaborate, forming what are called Golgi ten-don organs), or in capsulated endings such as Pacinian cor-puscles. The former are situated in the substance of the tendon, close to the musculotendinous junction, while the latter are found in the tendon sheath. These nerve endings provide an important mechanism whereby an increase of tension in the tendon initiates proprioceptive impulses, which are conveyed to the central nervous system. In addi-tion, tendons and their sheaths are supplied with a plexus of exceedingly fine nerve fibers of the type that appears to be associated with the conduction of painful impulses.