Considering the many conditions in which myofibroblasts occur, their heterogeneous cytoskeletal composition, and the various functions attributed to them, it seems difficult at first glance to assume a common origin for these cells. In 1867, Cohnheim proposed the vascular theory, which states that leukocytes are transformed into fibroblasts during the process of wound healing. Several subsequent studies, however, provided evidence that granulation tissue fibroblasts arise rather from local connective tissue cells. As we shall see below, circulating bone-marrow derived cells and resident tissue fibroblasts are now recognized as examples of many precursors to the myofibro-blasts found in granulation tissue. Many myofibroblast precursors are of mesenchy-mal origin and locally available, including fibroblasts and mesenchymal progenitor cells that reside in the connec-tive tissue architecture of all organs, smooth muscle cells in the arterial wall, pericytes in vascularized tissues, chondrocytes in cartilage and osteoblasts in bone. In kidney, lungs and tumors, epithelial and/or endothelial cells have been proposed to generate myofibroblasts by epithelial- or endothelial-to-mesenchy-mal transition. In the diseased liver, hepatic stellate cells from meso/endodermal origin contribute to the myofibroblast population together with portal fibroblasts. In addition to locally resid-ing cells, myofibroblasts can be recruited from circulating progenitors, such as fibrocytes of hematopoietic origin and bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. In vitro, stimulation with TGF-pl produces the myofibro-blast phenotype from fibroblastic cells, mesangial cells, bone-marrow-derived circulating cells, hepatic stellate cells, astrocytes, epithelial cells, chondrocytes, and osteoblasts. In light of this impressive variety of possible myofibro-blast precursors three main conclusions may be drawn: to rapidly fulfill the demands on reparative cells following organ injury, our body can recruit a vast spectrum of locally available and circulating cells. The term myofibroblast encompasses a very heterogeneous cell population with common contractile but possibly different molecular and functional characteristics. On this basis, myofibroblasts may be considered as a phenotype that can evolve from many precursors rather than a defined cell type. In the fol-lowing section, we will discuss some of the most frequent myofibroblast precursors in selected organs and conditions. Ultrastructural, immunohistochemical, and biochemi-cal data provide evidence that during culture or pathologic conditions, including the atheromatous plaque, smooth muscle cells acquire morphologic and biochemical features of the myofibroblast. A vascular origin of the myofibroblast was also proposed on the basis of mor-phologic observations. Earlier studies suggested that des-min-positive cells migrate from the wall of vessels to the tissue. A possible source of myofibroblasts express-ing vimentin and desmin also are the stromal cells of vari-ous organs positive for des min but negative for a-smooth muscle actin. Culturing mesenchymal cells within the mammary gland stroma in a microenviron-ment mimicking in vivo conditions indicates that although most myofibroblasts are derived from fibroblasts, a certain proportion are derived from vascular smooth muscle cells and a lesser proportion from pericytes.In the diseased kidney, glomerular mesangial cells have been shown to acquire myofibroblastic features, includ-ing the expression of a-smooth muscle actin and collagen, in several experimental and human pathologic situations. In the lung, septal fibroblasts which normally possess contractile features without expressing a-smooth muscle actin, can be induced to express this protein and collagen type I mRNA upon pathologic stimuli, such as bleomycin treatment. In addition to these mesenchymal precursors, both lung and kidney seem to recruit myofibroblasts from epithelium and/or endothelium. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition plays an important role in myofibroblast accumulation taking place in kidney interstitial fibrosis, the source of myofibroblasts being tubular epithelial cells, and in dialysis-induced peritoneal fibrosis, the source of myofibroblasts being mesothelial cells. Acquisition of the myoid phenotype is associated with epithelial-/endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition but seems to be controlled by distinct signal-ing pathways. It has to be noted that the in vivo occurrence of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition is still controversial. The local derivation of myofibroblasts from mesenchymal cells in the absence of any signs of epithelial or endothelial cells has recently been docu-mented in a model of renal interstitial fibrosis by means of genetic lineage tracing. In the liver, an abundant clinical and experimental liter-ature has shown that, during the onset of experimental and human hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis, perisinusoidal stellate cells of the liver are the most likely source of myofibroblastic cells. The conditions facilitating the modulation of perisinusoidal stellate cells into myofibroblasts have been studied, and extracellular matrix components and cytokines have been suggested as possible initiators. In this context, it is noteworthy that when hepatic stellate cells are subjected to in vivo ischemia reperfusion injury, they exhibit a de novo temporary increase of a-smooth muscle actin expression. A similar phenomenon takes place during the initial phases of liver transplantation in humans. Likely, this represents a response to ischemic injury. More recently, evidence has been provided that hepatic stellate cells are not the sole myofibroblast precursors in the liver. Depending on the type of hepatic insult, a differential con-tribution of portal fibroblasts, local and circulat-ing stem cells and circulating cells of hematopoietic origin was demonstrated. Recruitment of myofibroblasts from circulating pre-cursors appears to be common to a variety of organ sys-tems. Buccala and coworkers have identified bone-marrow-derived cells of hematopoietic origin, named fibrocyte, with fibroblast-like properties. Peripheral blood fibrocytes can rapidly enter the site of injury at the same time as circulating inflammatory cells. It has been suggested that circulating fibrocytes may represent an important source of myofibroblasts during healing of extensive burn wounds, where it may be difficult for fibroblasts to migrate from the wound edge. This study has also shown that fibrocyte development is systematically elevated in burn patients. Since fibrocytes lose their hematopoietic markers in an ani-mal model of wound healing within hours of recruitment and maturation in the inflamed tissue, it remains difficult to ultimately determine whether fibrocytes as such are able to differentiate into the myofibroblast in vivo or whether they preferentially localize to sites of myofibroblast accumulation. It has been also shown that bone marrow-derived myofibroblasts contribute to fibrosis in different organs, during vascular remodeling, in the context of tumor development, in lung fibrosis, in chronic asthma and following dermal wounding. On the basis of the employed markers it is also possible that fibrocytes are involved in car-diac repair and the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Fibrocytes are not the only cell types that originate from bone marrow with the ability to differentiate into myofi-broblasts. Bone marrow contains a fraction of a-smooth muscle actin expressing myofibroblasts, which are part of the non-hematopoietic stromal compartment of the bone marrow and which have the capacity to circulate in peripheral blood. Some of these bone marrow-derived cells seem to represent a circulating fraction of mesenchy-mal stem cells. In conclusion, a plethora of cells, including fibroblasts, vascular smooth muscle cells, pericytes, perisinusoidal stel-late cells in the liver, renal tubular epithelial cells, mesan-gial cells, blood borne cells (fibrocytes and mesenchymal stem cells), and mesothelial cells can modulate into a myo-fibroblastic phenotype. It should be stressed, however, that the major source of myofibroblasts in most pathologic set-tings is the resident fibroblast. MECHANISMS OF MYOFIBROBLAST REGRESSION Granulation tissue formation involves the replication and migration of fibroblasts from normal tissues to the area of inflammation and the modulation of at least a proportion of them to the myofibroblastic phenotype. Angiogenesis takes place in a coordinated way, and granulation tissue acquires its typical features. When the wound closes, a gradual evo-lution toward scar tissue takes place that involves the disap-pearance of vascular cells and myofibroblasts with a pro-portional increase of extracellular matrix components. This phenomenon, which ends with the establishment of a scar, is more or less rapid according to the species, the location of granulation tissue, and the type of inflammation. When granulation tissue cells are not eliminated, there is the development of pathologic scarring (ie, hypertrophic scars and keloids), which are distinct clinical and patho-logic conditions, both characterized by a relative high degree of cellularity.Using several morphologic and biochemical techniques, it has been shown that the reduction in cell number (myofi-broblasts and vascular cells) observed during the transition between granulation tissue and scar formation is achieved to a great extent through apoptosis; whether the lack of apoptosis plays a role in the establishment of hypertrophic scar and keloid remains to be explored. It appears that apoptosis of granulation tissue cells takes place essentially after wound closure and affects myofibroblasts and vascular cells over a period of time, rather than occur-ring as a single and massive wave of cellular apoptosis. This observation is in line with the gradual resorption of granula-tion tissue after wound closure and with the observation that dead cells are digested by macrophages and surround-ing cells. It appears that granulation tissue cell apoptosis can be accelerated significantly by the application of a via-ble cutaneous flap. This observation underlines the importance of cell communication between normal con-nective tissue and granulation tissue. These reports suggest that, at least during normal wound healing, the process of myofibroblast differentiation generally ends with cell death; thus, myofibroblasts can be considered terminally differen-tiated cells. The question that remains to be answered is the stimu-lus that leads to apoptosis during wound healing. The loss of mechanical stress seems to be an important signal for dif-ferentiated myofibroblasts to de-differentiate and/or disap-pear. At the end of normal wound healing the extracellular matrix is reconstituted and assumes the mechanical load, thereby releasing embedded myofibroblasts from stress. Myofibroblast apoptosis has been induced by the stress-release of wound granulation tissue after removal of a flap coverage with splinting characteristics in vivo and by the relaxation of attached collagen gels in vitro. Fibroblasts in mechanically unrestrained floating versus anchored collagen matrices also show differences in cell proliferation and DNA synthesis. After contraction of float-ing collagen matrices there is a marked decline in DNA syn-thesis; the cell cycle becomes arrested and cell regression begins. In contrast, fibroblastic cells in anchored matrices continue to proliferate and to synthesize DNA. It is increasingly accepted that accumulation and persis-tence of myofibroblasts in different pathologic conditions, including fibrosis, are characterized by resistance to apopto-sis. Strategies are beginning to be developed to deliver myo-fibroblast-specific apoptosis-inducing drugs. Differ-ent gene products regulating cell death have been identified over the last decade. In fibroblasts, the c-myc protein and interleukin-1-converting enzyme, the mammalian homologue of the Caenorhabditis elegans gene ced-3, have been shown to induce apoptosis. In turn, it has been shown that the bcl-2 protein is capable of block-ing apoptosis; however, fibroblasts lack bel- 2 expres-sion, as assessed by antibody staining. At least two other intracellular pathways appear to be involved to provide myo-fibroblast persistence through anti-apoptotic activity. First, A D F A.Normal rat skin, no apoptotic cells are detected. B.Twelve-day-old wound tissue. C.Sixteen-day-old wound tissue. D.Twenty-day-old wound tissue. E.Twenty-five-day-old wound tissue. F.Thirty-day-old wound tissue. At 12 days, when a-smooth muscle actin expression is maximal, there is no nuclear staining for apoptotic cells; after this, the number of labeled cells increases, with a maximum at 20 days.There-afterIEand F),the number of labeled cells decreases.Ia-E x1000.) activation of focal adhesion kinase in cell-matrix junctions protects myofibroblasts from anoikis, which is apoptosis fol-lowing the loss of cell adhesion. The development of protein kinase inhibitors as specific inducers of myofibro-blast apoptosis is an exciting new avenue in fighting fibro-sis. Second, activation of the PI3K-AKT pathway by TGF-~l and endothelin-1 has been shown to protect myofi-broblasts from going into apoptosis. Hence, one pos-sible mechanism for apoptosis induction could be via the direct action and/or withdrawal of cytokines or growth fac-tors. Several factors have been shown to increase the rate of wound healing, including platelet-derived growth factor, TGF-~, and tumor necrosis factor. These factors may be present in the normal healing wound, released by platelets and inflammatory cells. Itis probable that, as the wound heals and resolves, there is a decrease in the level of these factors. Alternatively, fac-tors selectively causing the death of myofibroblasts and vascular cells might be liberated after epithelialization has been completed. Additional work is necessary to identify these hypothetical factors, but it appears that apoptosis is the mechanism through which vascular and myofibroblastic cells are gradually eliminated from normally healing granu-lation tissue. Evidence is accumulating that cell death by apoptosis is not the only possible fate and that myofibroblasts, under certain conditions, can revert into a non-fibrogenic cell type. Insitu, the myofibroblast character of liver hepatic stellate cells appears to be reversible whereas myofibroblast differ-entiation of portal fibroblasts seems to be unidirectional, terminating in apoptosis. Instandard culture, hepatic stellate cells almost instantaneously develop into myofibro-blasts and cease to proliferate whereas portal fibroblasts con-tinue to multiply. During the last several years the assumption that myofibroblast differentiation can be modu-lated has been experimentally supported, thus opening new possibilities of fibrosis control. The role of MyoD in regulating these processes has been proposed and may fur-nish additional tools to control wound healing and related pathologic processes. Itremains to be shown whether myofibroblast de-differentiation is an exceptional phenom-enon or occurs more generally.