Schwann cells move freely between and around developing peripheral nerve axons, forming primitive sheaths around the neurites and growing in parallel with them. Contact with axons stimulates Schwann cell division in-vitro. In-vivo Schwann cell multiplication virtually ceases in the normal adult animal, but mitotic activity is induced by peripheral nerve damage. It is thought that exposure of the axon to the Schwann cell following loss of myelin sheaths or during axonal regeneration following axonal degeneration promotes Schwann cell division and that the relationship between Schwann cells and axons in the normal nerve induces some sort of contact inhibition in the Schwann cells. If axon regeneration does not occur following axon damage, Schwann cells gradually decrease in number, suggesting that Schwann cell growth and survival depend on contact with axons. Experimental evidence also suggests that continued axon regeneration depends on the presence of Schwann cells. By the ninth week of gestation, fascicles of the human sural nerve are identifiable and contain large axon bundles surrounded by Schwann cell processes. Between weeks 10 and 15, Schwann cells extend several long flat-tened processes that wrap around large clusters of fine axons. At this stage, two to four Schwann cells are located within a common basement membrane and form Schwann "families". Myelination of peripheral nerves in humans commences between the 12th and 18th week of gestation. Initia-tion of myelination depends on the diameter of the axon and its association with Schwann cells. By the time that axons have increased in diameter to between 1.0 and 3.2 11m, they are in a 1:1 relationship with Schwann cells and have either formed mesaxons or membrane spirals with compact myelin sheaths of 3 to 15 layers. The reason why some nerves become myelinated and others do not is not clear. Both Schwann cells around myelinated fibers and around unmyelinated fibers are able to produce myelin but the factors that determine whether myelination occurs are unknown. Certain transcription factors, such as Krox-20 and Oct-6, are known to be involved in the myelination pro-gram. In Oct-6 null mice, for instance, myelination is severely delayed while in Krox-20 null mice myelination fails completely. Schwann cells in developing and regenerat-ing peripheral nerves also express high levels of the neuro-trophin receptor p75NTR. Neurotrophins are a family of proteins that playa variety of functions in the develop-ment and maintenance of the peripheral nervous system. Certain glycoproteins, such as myelin-associated gly-coproteins, are believed to participate in establish-ing specific Schwann cell-axon interactions in the develop-ing peripheral nervous system. Experimental studies have shown that axons may induce the formation of myelin if the unmyelinated sympathetic chain is grafted on to a myelinated nerve such as the saphenous nerve. Schwann cells that had not previously formed myelin will do so if they come into contact with large, regenerating axons that were previously myelinated. It appears also that Schwann cells may influence the caliber ofaxons since the axonal diam-eter may be decreased markedly in some hereditary demy-elinating neuropathies in which there is a genetic defect in Schwann cells and in myelination. It has been demonstrated that myelinating Schwann cells control the number and phosphorylation state of neurofilaments in the axon, leading to enlargement of the axon itself. Conversely, absence of myelin results in fewer neurofilaments, reduced phosphorylation levels, and therefore smaller axon diame-ters. MAG acts as a myelin signal that modulates the caliber of myelinated axons. Maintenance of an axon therefore appears to depend not only on influences from the neuron cell body but also on interactions of the axon with the accompanying Schwann cells. Some 70% ofaxons within a mixed sensory nerve such as the sural nerve are very small and will become segregated into groups of 8 to 15 axons lying in longitudinal grooves within one Schwann cell; these will form the unmyelinated fibers within the peripheral nerve. Thus, all axons in the peripheral nervous system are invaginated into the surfaces of Schwann cells, but myelin sheaths only form around the larger axons, which represent only a small proportion of peripheral nerve fibers.