To fully appreciate the anatomy of the pituitary (hypophy-sis), an understanding of its embryogenesis is essential. The gland consists of an anterior lobe, a posterior lobe, and an intermediate zone. The development of each differs significantly. The adenohypophysis has its origin in a thickening of oral ectoderm. During the third week of gestation, this thickened plate invaginates in a cephalad direction to form the Rathke's pouch, which retains its connection to the stomodeum via a narrow stalk. In the sixth week, the stalk becomes so attenuated that the pouch loses its stomodeal attachment as it comes into contact with the infundibulum. Cellular proliferation in the anterior wall of Rathke's pouch gives rise to the pars distalis, the principal portion of the anterior lobe. In addition, a "tonguelike" extension of the pars distalis, the pars tuberalis, grows upward to partially surround the anterior surface of the infundibulum. The posterior portion of Rathke's pouch gives rise to what in humans is a thin segment of pituitary, the pars intermedia or intermediate lobe. In this zone, microcystic remnants of Rathke's pouch containing colloid-like material are com-monly seen. Gross cystic dilatation of such remnants is common but infrequently produces clinically significant intermediate lobe or Rathke's cleft cysts. A remnant of the pharyngohypophysial stalk, demon-strable in fetuses and occasionally encountered in adults,Variation in Normal Morphology of the Adenohypophysis 365 Age-related Changes of the Adenohypophysis 367 Neurohypophysis 368 Variation in Normal Morphology of the Neurohypophysis 368 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS 369 REFERENCES 370 comprises the pharyngeal pituitary. Located in the mid-line, beneath the muco-periosteum of the nasopharynx, it extends from the posterior border of the vomer along the sphenoid bone. Although the full spectrum of anterior pituitary hormone-producing cells may be demonstrated in pharyngeal pituitaries, they are rarely the seat of medical or surgical disease. The neurohypophysis develops from a neuroectoder-mal bud first noticeable in the floor of the diencephalon at 4 weeks' gestation. Two weeks later, the outgrowth grows ventrally to abut the posterior portion of Rathke's pouch. This specialized portion of the nervous system comprises the mag-nocellular nuclei, their axons within the median eminence and infundibular stalk, and their terminations in the pars nervosa. Oxytocin and vasopressin, as well as their carrier proteins the neurophysins, are detectable in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei at 19 weeks and in the posterior lobe at 23 weeks. As early as 7 to 8 weeks' gestation, the portal system begins to develop. Although by 12 weeks both the median eminence and the anterior lobe are vascularized, the cir-culation of the hypothalamic-pituitary portal system is not completed until 18 to 20 weeks. The hypothalamus develops from a swelling in the dien-cephalon. Although the hypothalamic nuclei as well as the supraopticohypophysial tract are demonstrable at 8 weeks' gestation, unmyelinated axons growing ventrally from the magnocellular nuclei do not reach the posterior lobe until 6 months. plane. The posterior lobe is located at the top of the field. A few inter-mediate lobe cysts are present. The deep red color of the anterior lobe is a reflection of its extensive vascularity. By 12 weeks, a number of cartilaginous plates have fused to form the cartilaginous neurocranium.The body of the sphenoid bone and the sella turcica results from fusion of hypophysial cartilaginous plates located on either side of the developing pituitary. The sella is well formed by 7 weeks and matures through a process of enchondral ossification. Rare developmental malformations of the pituitary gland, including ectopic pituitary gland in the suprasellar region and pituitary dystopia, have been reported. The understanding of pituitary development has recently expanded as a result of the identification of molec-ular mechanisms that may specify cell determination and differentiation. Recent advances in pituitary development in mammals have suggested that pituitary organogenesis is controlled by a combination of sequential exogenous ing the pituitary stalk and surrounding structures. The pituitary gland has been removed. The proximity of the optic chiasm to the pituitary is the basis for the visual field deficits accompanying suprasellar extension of pituitary adenomas. Visible along the posterior aspect of the stalk are tributaries of the portal system.and endogenous signals. These signals induce the expression of interacting transcriptional regulators in tem-poral and spatial patterns. Pituitary cell types appear to emerge from a common pluripotent stem cell under the response of lineage-specific transcription factors and locally produced growth factors critical for determination and dif-ferentiation of specific cell type. Briefly, the early pituitary organogenesis requires three functionally oriented tran-scription factors, the Rathke's pouch homeobox pro-tein Pax-6, the pituitary homeobox factor 1, and the structurally related pituitary homeobox factor 2. Pit-I is a transcription factor that regulates the functional differentiation of the somatotrophs, lactotrophs, and thyro-trophs. For proper Pit-I function, there is requirement of another early determinant of pituitary differentiation, the Prophet of Pit -1. High levels of estrogen recep-tors in cells that contain Pit-I favor prolactin expres-sion, whereas thyrotrope embryonic factor induces thyroid-stimulating hormone expression. Familial and sporadic Prop-I mutations result in combined growth hormone, PRL, TSH, and gonadotropin deficiency. A family of basic helix-loop-helix transcription fac-tors, neuroDI/f32, and a novel T box factor, Tpit, appear to synergistically playa role in the functional differentiation for pituitary proopiomelanocortin cell lineage and corticotroph cells. The transcription factor Prop-I induces the pituitary development of Pit-I-specific lineages as well as gonadotrophs. The nuclear receptors steroidogenic fac-tor-I, SF-I, and DAX-I are key factors for further differen-tiation of gonadotroph cells. The time period of recognition of the various human pituitary hormone-producing cells during embryonal devel-opment have been well determined by immunohistochemi-cal stains. Corticotrophs are the first cells to differentiate in the human fetal pituitary (at around 5 weeks gestational lastl\®e' ~ lesser Wing OfspbOOOICl. ~nol'and~ eljnold~--opIIC (;Mal I I, t I, I It r, J I I age). Somatotrophs appear around 8 to 9 weeks, followed by thyrotrophs and gonadotrophs at 12 to 15 weeks. Lac-totrophs, although seen in small numbers as early as 12 weeks, are only fully recognizable at 23 weeks.