Dura Mater The dura is composed of two tightly annealed layers of fibrous connective tissues. The outer layer functions as the periosteum of the cranium, whereas the inner meningeal layer is joined to the arachnoid membrane by weak inter-cellular junctions and focally forms the four dural redupli-cations that compartmentalize the cranial cavity: The falx cerebri, falx cerebelli, tentorium cere belli, and diaphragma sellae. The two layers of the dura separate to accommo-date the dural venous sinuses; the inner meningeal layer is pierced by draining veins and by arachnoid villi. The latterconduct CSF back into the venous circulation and are obvi-ous over the superior parasagittal convexities of the cerebral hemispheres where they project into the superior sagittal sinus. They are present in all other major venous sinuses, as well. They are often observed along the posterior margin of the cerebellar hemispheres in relation to the sinus confluens and the transverse venous sinuses. Small villi are also present intraspinally. The epithelial properties of arachnoid granulations are reflected ultrastructurally in elongated, interdigitating cell processes bonded together with desmosomes and immuno-histochemically, by positivity for epithelial membrane anti-gen. These features are also characteristic of menmgiornas. With age, the deposition of collagen enlarges the arach-noid villi that are then referred to as pacchionian bodies (Fig-ure 11.53). Such large granulations frequently press through the overlying roof of the superior sagittal sinus and its lateral lacunae to produce small pits or depressions in the inner table of the calvarium. These are known as the foveolae granulares or pacchionian foveolae. Portions of the dura, particularly the falx cerebri and parasagittal dura associated with the superior sagit-tal sinus, often calcify nonspecific ally with age. Calcification may also be seen in association with chronic renal failure. Focal ossification is sometimes encountered as an incidental finding. arachnoid space to the venous circulation and are accordingly found in relation to all major dural venous sinuses. The villi are most prominent in the superior sagittal and transverse sinuses. With advancing age, they undergo collagenous hypertrophy, as seen in these micrographs, and may then be referred to as pacchionian bodies. The enlarged villi remodel the overlying bone of the inner table ofthe calvarium to produce small pits termed pacchionian foveolae, or foveolae granulares. Nests of meningothelial cells may be seen anywhere along the arachnoid membrane, but are especially prominent in the apical regions of arachnoid granulations where they are termed arachnoid cap cells,and in the arachnoid covering the orbitofrontal cortex. Normal meningothelial cells are innately inclined to form whorls and psammoma bodies, two features that are often retained by their neoplastic counterparts, meningiomas. The meningothelial cells of the arachnoid membrane, including the cap cells, serve an epithelial function. Accordingly, they possess elongated, intertwined cell processes that are tightly spot welded together by numerous desmosomes and exhibit strong immunopositivity for epithelial membrane antigen. Like the tendency to form whorls and psammoma bodies, these epi-thelial phenotypic traits are retained by neoplastically transformed meningothelial cells and serve as useful diagnostic features of the vast majority of meningiomas which otherwise exhibit a very broad range of light microscopic morphologies. Pia-arachnoid The arachnoid forms a continuous sheet immediately sub-jacent to the dura. On the basis of descriptive and experi-mental ultrastructural observations, it is now generally accepted that the dura and arachnoid exist in vivo as a physically continuous tissue, with sparse but unequivocal intercellular junctions linking these two historically discrete membranes. The storied subdural space has, thus, taken its rightful place in the pantheon of neuromythology, alongside brain lymphatics and the syncytial theory of the neural net. It has been proposed that the term spatium subdurale be eliminated from the standardized nomenclature of Nomina Anatomica. Nevertheless, there is no disputing the fact that the interface between dura and arachnoid constitutes the weak link or path of least resistance for pathologic pro-Acesses that tend to disrupt the meninges. It seems unlikely that such venerable terms as subdural hematoma will soon be cashiered. The pia mater and arachnoid are often considered as a single delicate covering of the brain and spinal cord (the pia-arachnoid or leptomeninges). The arachnoid is connected to the pia by delicate strands termed arachnoid trabeculae. In the young, the arachnoid is crystal clear, but with age it becomes gradually thickened. The extent of this change varies considerably. In some cases, it is severe enough to raise concern about a pathologic process-men-ingitis and meningeal carcinomatosis being the two usual suspects. This normal age-related arachnoid thickening is typically most pronounced over the dorsal parasagittal cerebral convexities. Microscopically, it results from the externally and by the pia mater internally. Delicate arachnoid trabeculae course between these two mem-branes. In adults, gradual collagen deposition in the subarachnoid spaceresults in grossly appreciable "clouding" of the leptomeninges. This aging fibrosis appears grossly as diffuse opacification with focal plaques and small punctate nodules. It is characteristically most prominent along the dorsal cerebral convexi-ties adjacentto the superior sagittal sinus. plaques are common incidental findings at autopsy and occur mostfre-quently in the dorsal spinal arachnoid, although they may occasionally be seen in the cerebral leptomeninges as well. deposition of dense bundles of collagen, analogous to the collagenous hypertrophy of arachnoid villi that occurs prominently in the same vicinity. Focal nests of arachnoid cells (also called meningothe-lial cells) may be seen throughout the arachnoid membrane, but are concentrated over the arachnoid villi (arachnoid cap cells). These distinctive elements become more obvious and more clustered with advancing age and, in the adult, often form whorls with centrally placed psam-moma bodies. At this point, the resemblance of these nests to those of the meningioma is inescapable. As mentioned previously, small nests of arachnoid cells are also present intraventricularly in the vascular connective tissue core of the choroid plexus. Both normal and neoplastic meningothelial cells are immunoreactive forepithelial membrane antigen-an understandable property considering the epithelial phenotype of the desmosome-containing meningothelial cell. The dorsal leptomeninges of the thoracic and lumbosa-cral spinal cord occasionally contain white wafer-like plaques, a finding that is often termed arachnoiditis ossificans. In fact, in most of the cases these brittle lesions are roentgenographically and histologically devoid of bone or mineral. Rather, they most often consist of laminated and hyalinized fibrous tissues. True arachnoiditis ossilicans generally occur in the context of prior symptomatic inflam-mation or trauma to the leptomeninges. Hyaline plaques, in contrast, are typically discovered as an incidental finding at autopsy in the absence of any relevant clinical history. Like the dura, the pia is traditionally divided into two layers: The epipia, which covers the surface of the CNS parenchyma and surrounds the vasculature, and the intima pia, which extends into the CNS parenchyma as the pos-terior median and intermediate septa of the spinal cord. Classically, three specialized structures of the epipia are recognized: The denticulate ligaments on either side of the spinal cord, the linea splendens adjacent to the anterior spi-nal artery, and the filum terminale. All three structures are composed primarily of dense bundles of collagen. The filum terminale, which forms the terminus of the spinal cord, warrants additional brief description. As noted earlier, it is composed largely of leptomeningeal collagen but also contains small blood vessels, occasional small nerve fascicles, and may harbor focal collections of adiposites in a minority of normal individuals. Most importantly, however, it is an ependymal remnant of the central canal . This structure is the source of origin for a unique neoplasm of the conus medullaris and filum terminale: The myxopapillary ependymoma. B from the conus medullaris surrounded by the nerve roots of the cauda equina. As seen in cross section, the filum is composed primarily of dense collagenous tissue and contains blood vessels, small peripheral nerve fascicles, and, of significant clinical importance, a small, often eccentrically located, ependymal rem-nant ofthe central canal. D illary ependymoma. A remnant of the embryonic terminal ventricle of Krause, which consists of a focal dilatation of the central canal located in the region of the junction of the conus medullaris with the filum, may be encountered in sections from this vicinity. confused with neuromelanin-containing catecholaminergic neurons) are normal constituents of the pia-arachnoid and are often grossly visible as a dusky brown discoloration of the leptomeninges overlying the ventral aspect of the brain stem and cervical spinal cord. On cross section their rounded profiles might be confused with hemosiderin-laden macro phages but on longitudinal section their elongated, dendritic quality is evident. Leptomeningeal Melanocytes True melanocytes like those found in the skin are normal cel-lular constituents of the meninges. They are typically most concentrated in the leptomeninges of the ventral aspect of the upper cervical spinal cord and medulla oblongata (see . In individuals with an abundant melanocytic presence, the distribution territory extends upward through the pontine cistern and mesencephalic interpeduncular fossa, lateral to the inferior cerebellar hemispheres and mesial aspects of the temporal lobes, and as far rostrally as the gyri recti of the orbitofrontal cortex. It is not unusual for melanocytes to follow the investing leptomeninges of the perivascular Virchow-Robin spaces around large penetrat-ing arteries for short distances into the eNS parenchyma. Intrinsic melanocytes of the leptomeninges may be involved in a spectrum of proliferative conditions ranging from benign melanocytoma to primary eNS melanoma, with all of these entities being exceptionally rare. In con-trast, the normal presence of melanocytes in the lepto-meninges must always be borne in mind when examining surgical biopsies from eNS sites known to harbor these distinctive elements; one must avoid misinterpreting them as evidence of a melanocytic neoplasm or as hemosiderin-laden macrophages. With regard to the latter, the long dendritic processes of the melanocytes are gener-ally quite distinctive. Optic Nerve The optic nerves (as well as the optic tracts and optic chi-asm) are direct extensions of the eNS and not peripheralNormal Lipofuscin in large neurons Lipofuscin-like pigment in the infundibulum and neurohypophysis Neuromelanin Melanocytic melanin Melanin in fetal pineal gland Abnormal Hemosiderin from hemorrhage Melanin of metastatic melanoma Melanin of pigmented primary CNS tumors Lipochrome-like pigment in many "melanotic" CNS tumors Pigmented fungi Malaria pigment Artifact "Formalin pigment" nerves. The significance of this fact is that the myelin of the optic nerves is of the central type and is produced by oligodendroglia, not Schwann cells. Thus, the optic nerves are susceptible to diseases of eNS white matter, such as multiple sclerosis. Being extensions of the eNS, the optic nerves are surrounded by the three meninges, pia mater, arachnoid, and dura mater, with the enclosed subarachnoid space. The presence of an arachnoid layer surrounding the optic nerve explains the occurrence of optic sheath meningiomas. by leptomeninges, which includes the pia mater and arachnoid together with the enclosed cerebrospinal fluid-containing subarachnoid space. The leptomeninges and subarachnoid space are in turn covered by the densely fibrous dura mater, which in this location, is often referred to as the optic nerve sheath. At higher magnification, leptomeningeal arachnoid cell clusters are clearly seen. The presence of arachnoid cell nests around the optic nerve must be borne in mind when examining intraoperative frozen tissue sections from this neuroanatomic vicinity.