The development of skeletal muscle is orchestrated in the unborn baby by a host of genes, many of which are now being discovered and are too numerous to discuss in detail, although the role of several important ones will beSPECIAL TECHNIQUES 222 FUNCTION 223 GENDER, TRAINING, AND AGING 225 ARTIFACTS 227 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS 229 SPECIMEN HANDLING 231 REFERENCES 232 mentioned below. These genes have the function of regu-lating the transformation of mesenchyme into muscle tis-sue and of reorganizing previously formed tissue through processes such as apoptosis. We will have more to say about the molecular biology of muscle development after a discussion of some basic embryology, the details of which may be found elsewhere. Skeletal muscle develops embryologically from somatic mesodermal tissue. The par-axial mesoderm is first apparent on day 17 and is the ori-gin of the somites that are completely formed by day 30. At this time, a series of 42 to 44 pairs of rounded somites can be found adjacent to the notochord in the midline. By the fourth week, the mesodermal somites separate into the dermatomes and segmental myotomes. The latter give rise to the muscles of the body wall. The dorsal division of myotomes, the epimeres, represents the origin of the back muscles, whereas the ventral division hypomeres differenti-ate into the lateral and ventral muscles of the body wall, including the intercostals, abdominal obliques, and strap muscles of the neck. The muscles of the extremities arise from the limb buds that form from the lateral plate meso-derm that is also the origin of the bone, tendon, ligaments, and blood vessels. In the human embryo, the mesenchyme of the limb buds appears at about the fourth week of gesta-tion and is subject to induction by the somites. At the end of the eighth week, the primordia of individual muscles can be appreciated. Muscle tissue is not derived directly from the lateral plate mesoderm but from somitic mesoderm, which invades the limb bud in week 5. Differentiation of the limb musculature follows a cephalocaudad and proximal-to-distal progression. In each limb, the somitic mesenchyme subdivides into a dorsal and ventral mass with respect to the skeletal elements. The extensor, abductor, and supinator muscles are derived from the dorsal mass, whereas the flexor, adductor, and pronator muscles originate from the ventral mass. The most immature muscle cells are myoblasts. These are small, round, mononucleate cells with prominent nucle-oli and evidence of mitotic activity. Myoblast cytoplasm contains no microscopically detectable filaments, but ribo-somes can be identified. Masses of proliferating myoblasts represent the source of myotubes, the next step in myo-genesis. Myotubes appear to arise as a result of fusion of the more primitive myoblasts. Myoblast fusion has been shown to depend upon a plasma membrane glycoprotein with a molecular weight of 38 kDa. This surface marker presumably allows fusing myoblasts to recognize each other. The 38-kDa membrane protein is also found on immature myotubes and satellite cells. Ultrastructurally, myoblasts are seen to have contact with each other through filopo-dia. Adjacent myoblasts are often joined by gap junctions. Fusing myoblasts become longitudinally oriented, a pro-cess that requires fibronectin. At this stage of myogenesis, groups of primitive muscle cells, including myoblasts and myotubes, are enclosed by a common basement membrane. In each cluster, there is usually one larger primary myotube. Between groups of cells are aggregates of interstitial cells. Myotubes differ from myoblasts by the presence of mul-tiple nuclei and cytoplasmic filaments. Filaments first form at the peripheral portions of the sarcoplasm and consist of 10 nm fibroblast-like fibrils that disappear during matura-tion. Immunohistochemical techniques also demonstrate the presence of desmin and vimentin within myotubes. More mature secondary myotubes have a larger diameter, increased numbers of nuclei that are central in cross sec-tions, and more prominent myofilaments. These have large central nuclei.cells also begin to show evidence of contractile activity Secondary myotubes eventually give rise to muscle fibers. As they approach this stage of development, secondary myotubes cease fusing and develop acetylcholine receptor protein on the cell surface. At first receptor pro-tein is diffusely distributed on the cell surface, but it later becomes focused into so-called hot spots where motor end-plates will develop. Muscle fibers differ from myotubes in that their nuclei are peripheral and their filaments are organized into sarco-meres. Muscle fibers also develop a sarcotubular system, and in time they become innervated. Immature muscle fibers often acquire multiple innervation sites, all but one of which eventually disappears. The number of myotubes continues to decline after the twenty-first week of gestation so that at the time of birth myotubes are histologically no longer conspicuous. As myo-tubes become fewer in number, the muscle fibers undergo histochemical differentiation, which begins in the fifth month of development. Between 15 and 20 weeks of ges-tation, a primitive progenitor of the checkerboard pattern emerges in which all myotubes and myofibers have high ATPase and oxidative enzyme activity. By 20 weeks gesta-tion, approximately 10% of fibers are larger in diameter, with both high oxidative enzyme activity and reduced ATPase activity. These fibers, which are basophilic in hematoxylin and eosin stains, are the so-called Wohlfart type B fibers and are the earliest example of type 1 fibers to be detected in developing muscle. The remaining 90% of fibers correspond to type 2 fibers with enhanced ATPase activity. Although type 2A and 2B fibers are not yet visible, a few type 2C fibers that stain dark in both acid and alkaline ATPase reactions are apparent. These fibers typically immunostain with antibodies to both fast and slow myosin. The more mature checkerboard histochemical pat-tern, which is stimulated by the innervation of fibers, is almost completed between 26 and 30 weeks of gestation. At birth, the histochemical mosaic begins to resemble that of mature adult muscle. Approximately 80% of fibers are clearly identified as type 1 or type 2. The remaining 20% are undifferentiated fibers that have both abundant oxida-tive enzyme activity and stain darkly in routine ATPase reac-tions. A few Wohlfart type B fibers remain at birth. Type 2C fibers are not encountered. As mentioned earlier, the development of skeletal mus-cle is under the control of several categories of genes and their products. Among these categories are transcription factors and signaling molecules such as growth factors and their receptors. A comprehensive discussion of this subject would not be appropriate, but a few illustrative examples will be given in recognition of the fact that these molecular events in the embryo will soon be relevant in the under-standing and diagnosis of muscle disease, especially the congenital myopathies and dystrophies. One of the important influences in the early stages of segmentation when the segmental identity of the somites is established is the expression of Hox genes, a family of homeobox genes that act as transcription factors involved in craniocaudal segmentation of the body. Myogenesis origi-nates with a population of mesenchymal cells that become devoted to a lineage of myogenic cells. The molecular basis of this transition rests with an array of myogenic regulatory factors, one of which is Pax-3 whose expression is highest in embryonic muscle. Pax-3 is induced by regulatory fac-tors such as sonic hedgehog and bone morphogenic protein. Pax-3 and other factors activate MyoD (myogenic determining factor), which leads to the formation of mono-nuclear myoblasts. MyoD along with Myf-5 (myogenic factor-S) are required for the proliferation of myoblasts. Later in development, noggin encoded by the Nag gene inactivates bmp4, thereby promoting differentiation. Pax-7 activates Nfix, which acts like a switch, turning on fetal genes and repressing embryonic genes. Nfix activates MCK, a promoter gene in myogenesis. In late myogenesis, myogenin expression is controlled byMyf-5; along with myoblast recognition and adher-ence mechanisms that rely on adhesion molecules such as M-cadherin, myogenin expression promotes myotube fusion and is ultimately important in increasing muscle mass. In turn, MRF-4 is responsible for differentiation into actual myofibers.