A variety of gross and macroscopic artifacts may compli-cate evaluation of the CNS. Many of these are seen fre-quently in surgical neuropathology practice, while a few are limited primarily to autopsy neuropathology (Table 11.3). Artifacts can be broadly separated into those that hinder diagnostic evaluation versus those that mimic his-topathologic lesions. Among the former are artifacts of the crush-burn-freeze-suck-soak group. The cavitational ultrasonic surgical aspirator is widely employed by neurosurgeons for the safe removal of diseased CNS tissue, particularly soft tumors, and a trap can be used to collect the aspirated tissue and saline irrigation solution for the submission for histologic evaluation. Although microscopic examination of CUSA material can be very informative, the pathologist must be aware of the artifacts that frequently accompany such Pre-operative Embolic Agents Gelatin foam Polyvinyl alcohol particles Acrylic microspheres Intra-operative Hemostatic Agents Resorbable Hemostatic Agents Gelatin foam Oxidized cellulose Microfibrillar bovine collagen Non-resorbable Hemostatic Agents "Retained" cotton ball/pledgets Surgically introduced Therapeutic Materials Gliadel wafers Muslin fabric specimens, including artificial distortion and smearing, and the introduction of extraneous material (bone dust, hemostatic agent). CUSA artifact is one cause of pseudone-crosis in CNS tissue samples. Among artifacts that mimic lesions, the most common are perinuclear halo artifact, collapsed leptomeningeal vessels and "bone dust". Artifacts: Many artifacts encountered in surgical pathol-ogy of the eNS prevent or severely hinder interpretation of the speci-men. Among these some are unique to the consultation service, such as postal service crush artifact IA) and hot weather bubble-wrap "paraffin pox", while others are secondary to surgical and laboratory tissue insults, such as severe freeze artifact Ie),cautery artifact, and ultra-sonic aspiration of brain tissue IE). Iatrogenically introduced foreign material is also encoun-tered with regularity by pathologists who examine CNS speci-mens and warrants brief mention. A variety of foreign agents are used to control bleeding during surgery and may be introduced preoperatively by the interven-tional radiologist for embolization of vascular lesions or intra-operatively by the surgeon to control hemorrhage during and unaware and so may be particularly misleading. For example, one of the most characteristic morphologic fea-tures of normal oligodendrocytes and their derivative tumors, oligodendrogliomas, in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections is the presence of perinuclear halos. However, depending on fixation conditions and other factors, prominent halos may sometimes be seen around other cell types, including neurons; care must be exercised in such situations to avoid misdiagnosis. Another example of misleading artifact is the tangle of normal blood vessels that results from collapsed vascular leptomeninges. The result can mimic vascular malformation. Before rendering a diagnosis of vascular abnormality in such circumstances, the adja-cent brain or spinal cord tissue should be examined for the evidence of associated features, such as gliosis, hemosiderin deposition, and granular bodies. Finally, also under the category of misleading artifact is "bone dust," which consists of microscopic fragments of cranial bone derived from the surgeon's drill that become intermixed with the tissue sample and can mimic calcification or ossification. In repeat operations, such bone dust fragments left in situ at the previous operation can be seen accompanied by a foreign body-type giant cell reaction. after surgery. All of these agents periodically appear in tissue sections. Since they are designed to be resorbable and can therefore be left in place, the morphologic appearance will vary depending on the time interval from placement at the ini-tial surgery and subsequent resection during a second surgery. Resorbable hemostatic agents elicit a chronic inflammatory reaction of variable inten-sity, which occasionally may be severe enough to create mass effect and clinical symptoms.There are a few artifacts with which the pathologist who examines postmortem eNS specimens should be familiar, the most common being autolysis of the cerebellar granular cell layer, mechanical distortion of the spinal cord produced by for-ceps pressure during removal, and the production of cystic cavities of varying size in the brain by the postmortem proliferation of gas-forming bacteria. eign material placed by the interventional radiologist or neurosurgeon and subsequently encountered by the pathologist upon tissue resection. The most common examples of this are embolic and hemostatic agents. Embolic materials are introduced by catheter prior to surgery for highly vascular lesions to reduce intraopera-tive bleeding; the most common are gelatin foam IA), acrylic resin spheres 18),and polyvinyl alcohol particles Ie).Hemostatic agents, in contrast, are placed in the surgical site to stop bleeding during the operation and often left in place after closing to prevent postoperative bleeding. The most commonly employed agents are gelatin foam 10),oxidized cellulose IE), and microfibrillar bovine collagen IF). only in autopsy specimens of the eNS. The most common of these are cerebellar conglutination jA, B), also known as "etat glace," which consists of autolytic dissolution of the granular cell layer of the cerebellum; "toothpaste" or "squeeze" artifact of the spinal cord je),which results from focal crushing of the cord by forceps during removal at autopsy and resultant internal herniation of the central gray matter, mimicking mal-formation or heterotopia; and "Swiss cheese brain" jO), which is a striking macroscopic vacuolization of the brain resulting from postmortem proliferation of gas-forming bacteria.