Adolescent breast development in the female begins with the onset of puberty and the cyclic secretion of estrogen and progesterone. However, a variety of other steroid and peptide hormones are also required for proper mammary gland development. The ducts elongate, branch, and develop a thickened epithelium due primarily to the influence of estrogen. The pro-cess of ductal growth and branching is largely indepen-dent of progesterone. There is an increase in the density of periductal connective tissue, also as a result of relative estrogen dominance. Deposition of stromal adipose tissueHormone Effects Estrogen Required for ductal growth and branching during adolescence Required for lobuloalveolar growth during pregnancy Required for induction of progesterone receptor Not necessary for maintenance of secretion or lactation Progesterone Required for lobuloalveolar differentiation and growth Probable mitogen in normal estrogen-primed breast Not necessary for ductal growth and branching Testosterone Stimulates breast mesenchyme during fetal development Causes mesenchymal destruction of mammary epithelium during critical period of testosterone sensitivity Glucocorticoids Required for maximal ductal growth Enhances lobuloalveolar growth during pregnancy Insulin Enhanced ductal-alveolar growth Enhances protein synthesis in mammary epithelium Required for secretory activity (with glucocorticoids and prolactin) Prolactin Stimulates epithelial growth after parturition Required for initiation and maintenance of lactation Human placental lactogenAble to substitute for prolactin in epithelial growth and differentiation Stimulates alveolar growth and lactogenesis in second half of pregnancy Growth hormone Required for ductal growth and branching during adolescence May contribute to lobuloacinar growth during pregnancy Thyroid hormone Increases epithelial response to prolactin May enhance lobuloacinar growth Adapted from McCarty KS, Nath M. Breast. In: Sternberg SS, ed. Histology for Pathologists. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven; 1997:71-82. occurs, and it is this adipose tissue that is largely respon-sible for the enlargement and protrusion of the breast disk at this time. Cyclical exposure to progesterone following exposure to estrogen during ovulatory cycles promotes lobuloacinar growth as well as connective tissue growth. Although the majority of breast development occurs dur-ing puberty, this process continues into the third decade and terminal differentiation of the breast is only induced by pregnancy. The adolescent male breast is composed of fibroadipose tissue and ducts lined by low cuboidal cells. magnification. B.High power.