There are 434 voluntary muscles in the human body. They comprise 25% of the total body weight at birth and 40 to 50% of the total weight in adults. Not surprisingly, a greater muscle mass is encountered in males than in females. Indi-vidual muscles vary greatly in size. For example, the small-est muscle in the body, the stapedius, measures only 2 mm in length. On the contrary, the sartorius and other large muscles of the extremities measure up to 2 feet in length. Skeletal muscles are composed of varying numbers of muscle fibers (eg, 10,000 in lumbricals and 1,000,000 in gastrocnemius). These are connected at both ends to ten-dons or the epimysium. Because the fibers work in conjunction with each other, they are aligned in the same direction. Few skeletal muscles are modeled after the lumbricals, where all the fibers are arranged in a fusiform structure that tapers at either end at the site of tendinous insertion. The more familiar unit is a parallelogram composed of muscle fibers that insert at both ends on a flat tendon composed of dense collagen. In a parallel muscle, the fascicles are parallel to the longitudinal axis of the muscle, as in the thyrohyoid. In oblique muscles, a tendon typically runs within the muscle or on its sur-face, and the muscle fibers insert obliquely on the tendon. Oblique muscles are most often pennate or featherlike. Some are bipennate, much like a feather in which there is a central shaft from which a series of barbs radiate on either side. Such muscles have a central tendinous structure from which two sets of parallel muscle fibers radiate (eg, pero-neus longus). Other muscles are simple pennate, in which only one set of parallel muscle fibers attaches obliquely on a shaftlike tendon. Muscles are designated as complex pennate when the muscle con-sists of multiple parallelograms attaching to several tendons in the muscle mass. Not all skeletal muscles follow pre-cisely the model of parallel or pennate design. They may be triangular like the pectoralis minor or spiral in structure like the forearm supinators. Although most muscles are attached to and are involved in moving bony skeletal struc-tures, some voluntary muscles (such as those of the larynx and esophagus) do not have attachments to bone. The blood supply to individual skeletal muscles has not been extensively studied and is therefore incompletely understood. It is known that the arterial supply to muscles varies somewhat with the individual. In general, the skeletal muscles are subserved by several rather than a single artery, which renders them rather resistant to ischemia from an embolus or from the disease of a single vessel. The vascular supply to skeletal muscle falls into one of the following five categories: 1. The blood supply is derived from a single nutrient artery that divides in a longitudinal fashion within the mus-cle itself. The gastrocnemius is an example of such a system. 2. The muscle is supplied by several separate arteries entering the muscle along its length. Anastomoses are formed within the muscle between the territories of each artery. This pattern is typical of the soleus. 3. The blood supply arises from a single main artery that enters the belly of the muscle and subsequently forms a radiating pattern of collaterals, as in the biceps brachii. 4.In muscles such as the tibialis anterior, a pattern of anastomosing arcades is derived from a series of pen-etrating arteries. This vascular pattern is considered to be the most efficient form of vascularization. 5. A less efficient form of the anastomosing arcade pat-tern is the rectangular pattern of anastomoses formed by a series of penetrating arteries. This so-called quad-rilateral pattern is seen in the extensor hallucis longus muscle. Once a main artery enters the muscle substance, it branches into a number of primary intramuscular arteries that ramify in the epimysium and perimysium. The primary arteries, with a diameter that ranges from 80 to 360 urn, give rise to numerous secondary arterioles that run parallel to the direction of the muscle fibers. The secondary arterioles often connect to primary arteries, forming artery-to-artery anastomoses. The secondary arterioles, which range in diameter from 50 to 100 urn, typically have a thin adventitia composed of fibroblasts and collagen. The smooth muscle coat is much thinner than that of the primary arteries, usu-ally having only two to three layers of cells. The internal elastica is prominent and continuous. The secondary arte-rioles branch to form terminal arterioles, which measure 15 to 50 urnin diameter. Their smooth muscle coat is usually only one layer of cells. The internal elastica becomes dis-continuous and is lost in smaller vessels. The distal por-tions of the terminal arterioles have precapillary sphincters, which are formed from the smooth muscle cells of the media. These sphincters are found in blood vessels with an inner diameter of less than 15 urn. Footlike processes between the smooth muscle cells and the endothelium may be seen in the region of the sphincters. As in other tissues, the arterioles end in an elaborate system of capillaries. In contrast to most other organs, a relatively small number of capillaries are open at rest inmuscle. During muscle activity, there is a considerable increase in the number of open capillaries. A marked differ-ence in capillary density is observed in different muscles, as well as in trained versus untrained subjects. Studies of capillary density reveal that the average single muscle fiber is surrounded by 1.7 capillaries. Capillary density may also be expressed as the number of capillaries per fiber, which on average in cross sections is 0.7. The density of capillaries also reflects oxygen consump-tion within muscle. Therefore, increased numbers of capil-laries are evident where larger numbers of type 1 fibers are present. This phenomenon is less evident in humans than in animals such as the cat, in which muscles are composed chiefly or totally of one fiber type. Thus in the cat soleus muscle, which is composed almost entirely of type 1 fibers, the density of capillaries is 1600 per mm/: In the gastroc-nemius, a muscle with far fewer type 1fibers, the capil-lary density is 600 per mrrr'. The capillaries within skeletal muscle travel primarily in a longitudinal direction, although they are frequently linked by short transverse branches. Ultrastructurally, capillaries are composed of endothe-lial cells surrounded by a basement lamina. Occasional pericytes are encountered outside the basement membrane. Endothelial cells typically contain numerous pinocytotic vesicles. Where endothelial cells are joined, they lack tight junctions. Hence the capillary endothelium is freely perme-able to tracers such as horseradish peroxidase. The capillary pericytes are essentially smooth muscle cells that contain large numbers of filaments. The pericytes are innervated by small-diameter unmyelinated nerve fibers. The basement membrane (which lies between the endothelium and peri-cytes) measures 20 to 30 nm, although some thickening and reduplication of the basal lamina occurs in older patients. The nerve supply to individual skeletal muscles often enters the surface of the muscle at the belly and is accompa-nied by one or more major penetrating arteries. Within the main nerve trunk are myelinated and unmyelinated axons. Contributions to the nerve are made from myelinated effer-ent motor fibers that innervate the muscle fibers; somatic afferent sensory fibers from muscle spindles, Golgi tendon organs, and Pacinian corpuscles; and unmyelinated auto-nomic efferent fibers. At least 50% of the fibers are sensory in function. The motor fibers that innervate the myofibers demonstrate a bimodal size distribution. The large diameter a-fibers innervate fast motor units, whereas the p-fibers are distributed to slow motor units and some intrafusal fibers of the muscle spindle. The y-fibers, with very small diameters, supply the remainder of the muscle spindle fibers. The large motor fibers are relatively uniform in diameter, measuring between 10 and 15 urn. The small motor fibers vary from 2 to 7urnin diameter. As the distal motor axon approaches the muscle fiber, it is transformed into the terminal axon, which represents the proximal portion of the neuromuscular junction, or MEP. The neuromuscular junction, measuring about 50 urnin diameter, is composed of the presynaptic portion or turally, the MEP consists of a terminal axon and a postsynaptic region formed by a specialized portion of the muscle fiber. The surface of the fiber is undulating, representing the postjunctional folds. terminal axon and the postsynaptic portion, which is formed by a unique region in the muscle fiber. The PRS and POS domains are separated by a specialized, 50 nm wide intercellular space, the synaptic cleft. The myelinated motor nerve terminates at the PRS region as an unmyelinated axonal segment that is enveloped by the teloglia, the distal projections of Schwann cells. The terminal axon and teloglia are covered by a layer of endoneu-rium, the sheath of Henle, which becomes continuous with the endomysium of the muscle fiber in the area of MEP. Numerous synaptic vesicles, each 45 to 50 nm in diam-eter, are found in the terminal axon. The vesicles are most plentiful around thickened zones of increased electron den-sity at the PRS membrane. Studies utilizing freeze-fracture electron microscopy have demonstrated that parallel pairs of double rows of intramembranous particles, measuring 10 nm in diameter, are located at these electron dense zones. The particles are considered to represent voltage-sensitive calcium channels known as active zones. At the POS region of the muscle fiber, the cell surface is elevated to form the hillock of Doyee, or sole plate. Within the sole plate, the sarcoplasm is granular, and a cluster of sarcolemmal nuclei is often seen. Nuclei in this loca-tion are plump and vesicular. The terminal axon ramifies in the sole plate as a series of branches called telodendria, which indent the surface of the fiber, producing gutters ortroughs. The surface of the fiber at the MEP is undulat-ing and redundant, creating the complex of postjunctional folds that can be demonstrated by supravital staining as the subneural apparatus of Couteaux. The spaces between the folds denote the secondary synaptic clefts. As a result of the formation of these clefts, the surface area of the POS membrane is increased to approximately 10 times the sur-face area of the PRS. The POS membrane of the folds is thicker and more densely stained at the crests than in the depths of the clefts. By electron microscopy, the juxtaneu-ral membrane at the crests of the folds contains irregularly spaced densities measuring 11 to 14 nm in diameter. In freeze-fracture preparations, on the P face of the mem-brane, the crests are studded with rows of particles that are similar in size to these densities. These large intramembranous particles are considered to represent the AChR, a pentameric 275 kDa glycoprotein.