Hypothalamus The pituitary is known to be under significant hypothalamic control. In fact, the pituitary and the hypothalamus form a complex neurohormonal circuit, a vital element for main-tainance of a normal endocrine status. Weighing approxi-mately 5 g and forming the lower walls and floor of the third ventricle, the hypothalamus lies above the pituitary to which it is connected by the pituitary stalk -12.7, 12.18-12.19). As the name suggests, the hypothalamus lies inferior to the thalamus. Although at first glance it appears poorly demarcated, the hypothalamus is bordered anteriorly by the anterior commissure, optic chiasm and lamina ter-rninalis; posteriorly and superiorly by the midbrain tegmen-tum and mamillary bodies; dorsally by the hypothalamus sulcus; and laterally by the subthalamic nuclei. The region consists of several ill-defined but functionally related neuronal nuclei. Afferent and effer-ent connections bring these nuclei into contact with nearby as well as remote portions of the central nervous system, including other diencephalic structures, the cerebrum, brain stem, and spinal cord. Two major and distinct hypo-thalamohypophysial secretory systems are recognized. The first is composed by the supraoptic and PVN and their pro-jections to the neurohypophysis (supraopticohypophysial mus and third ventricle. The PVN are visible as darkly staining areas beneath the ependyma of the third ventricle, whereas the SON lie above the heavily myelinated optic tracts. The arcuate nucleus lies inferior to the base of the third ventricle.and paraventriculohypophysial tracts); the other is com-posed mainly of nuclei of the tuberal region, the funnel-shaped floor of the third ventricle, and their processes ter-minating in the median eminence. The supraoptic nuclei are located superior to the optic tracts, whereas the wedge-shaped PVN lie ventromedial to the fornix and abut the walls of the third ventricle. Due to their predominant compo-sition of large neurons measuring up to 25 urn, these are termed magnocellular nuclei. Each contains vasopressin- and oxytocin-producing neurons, but only one hormone is produced by a given neuron. Their long axons form the supraopticohypophysial and paraventricu-lohypophysial tracts, which carry vasopressin and oxytocin, as well as their respective carrier proteins, the neurophysins, to the poste-rior lobe of the pituitary gland. Oxytocin and vasopressin, both nonapeptides, are syn-thesized mainly in the perikarya of magnocellular neurons in the SON and PVN; parvicellular neurons in the PVN also synthesize vasopressin. The two hormones differ by only two amino acids. Both are synthesized as a 20-kDa precursor peptide that is rapidly cleaved into the active hormone and its neurophysin carrier protein (neurophysin I and II), packaged into secretory granules in the Golgi as a hormone-neurophysin complex and secreted from nerve endings that terminate primarily in the neurohypophysis. Large intra-axonal accumulations of these hormones, named Herring bodies, are often visible by light microscopy as round, granular structures that appear eosinophilic on hematoxylin and eosin sections. In transit from the hypothalamus to the posterior lobe, prohor-mones undergo extensive processing and cleavage to form the final products, vasopressin and oxytocin. Although these hormones differ by only two amino acids, oxytocin exhibits virtually no antidiuretic activity, and vasopressin has negli-gible oxytocic effect. Oxytocin mediates the "milk let-down reflex" by stimulating contraction of myoepithelial cells sur-rounding terminal mammary lobules. In addition, it serves a role in parturition, binding, and facilitating contraction in the final stages of parturition. The major physiologic role of vasopressin, also called antidiuretic hormone, is the formation of hypertonic urine. Acting via cyclic adenosine monophosphate, vasopressin increases the water permea-bility of renal collecting ducts, allowing the hypotonic intra-ductal fluid to equilibrate with the hypertonic fluid in the medullary interstitium. The results are concentrated urine and conservation of body water. Genetic mutations in either the signal peptide or VP-neurophysin give rise to central diabetes insipidus. Likewise, damage to the neurohypophy-sis from head trauma, surgery, inflammatory processes, or neoplasms may destroy vasopressin-producing neurons and cause diabetes insipidus. The second component of the hypothalamohypophysial system is the tuberoinfundibular tract. Its fibers originate in istic of magnocellular nuclei. B. The nerve cell bodies stain positively for vasopressin. ill-defined nucleus is composed of small nerve cell bodies. B.Its constituent neurons stain for CRH, a tropic hormone that exerts its effect on corticotrophs in the anterior lobe (immunos-tain, original magnification xl00). Hypothalamic Hormone Pituitary Hormone Stimulatory Inhibitory GH GHRH Somatostatin PRL TRH Dopamine VIP ACTH CRH ? AVP FSH GnRH ? LH TSH TRH Somatostatin GH, growth hormone; GHRH,growth hormone-releasing hormone; SRIF or SST. somatotropin-release inhibiting factor; PRL,prolactin; TRH,thyrotropin-releasing hormone; VIP,vasoactive intestinal peptide; ACTH, adrenocorticotropin; CRH,corticotropin-releasing hormone; AVP,arginine vasopressin; FSH,follicle-stimulating hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone. a number of hypothalamic nuclei lying within the walls of the inferior third ventricle and tuberal region -12.19, 12.21). Products of these nuclei, targeted for the anterior pituitary, consist of releasing and inhibiting hormones. Unlike the magnocellular neurons of the SON and PVN, these are small neurons and for this reason are termed parvicellular neurons. Their pro-cesses project to the median eminence, a highly vascular zone, located in the posterior proximal portion of the pitu-itary stalk. Here, the hypothalamic hormones are released into the first portion of the portal system for transport to the anterior lobe. Ultrastructurally, the median eminence consists of closely packed nerve terminals containing mem-brane-bound neurosecretory granules. Because the termi-nals lie in close proximity to the fenestrated capillaries that form the origin of the portal system, the overall anatomic arrangement permits ready entry of hypothalamic releasing and inhibiting hormones and perhaps other modulators into the portal system and consequently the anterior lobe. The hypothalamic hormones include five peptide hor-mones: Corticotropin-releasing hormone, growth hormone-releasing hormone, gonadotropin-releasing hormone, thyrotropin-releasing hormone, and somatostatin (somatotropin-release inhibiting factor). The sites of synthesis of the various hypothalamic hormones, their characteristics, and target cells are summarized in Tables 12.1 and 12.2. In addition to these hormones, several bioactive substances produced in the hypothalamus participate in the regulation of anterior pituitary hormone secretion. The most significant one is dopamine which inhibits the secretion of PRL by pitu-itary lactotrophs. Adenohypophysis The pituitary is a tan to brown, bean-shaped structure vary-ing in weight from 500 to 700 mg. An average-sized gland of 600 mg measures about 13 x lOx 6 mm. Generally, the weight of the female pituitary is greater than Hypothalamic Sites Pituitary Hormone Target Hormone Arcuate nucleus GH IFG-1 Widely distributed in CNS with TSH T4,T3 concentration in ventromedial, dorsal, and paraventricular nuclei, particularly on left Widespread distribution with concentration FSH Estrogen in the arcuate, ventromedial, dorsal, and Luteinizing hormone Progesterone/Estrogen paraventricular nuclei Testosterone Periventricular, medial paraventricular ACTH Cortisol nuclei; co-localized with arginine DHEA vasopressin Periventricular nucleus, paraventricular GH N/A, arcuate nuclei Arcuate nucleus PRL N/AHormone GHRH TRH GnRH CRH Somatostatin DA GHRH,growth hormone-releasing hormone; GH, growth hormone; IFG-l, insulin-like growth factor-l; TRH, thyrotopin-releasing hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone, T4, thyroxine; T3, triiodothyronine; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone; FSH,follicle-stimulating hormone; CRH,corticotropin-releasing hormone; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone, GH, growth hormone; DA, dopamine; PRL, prolactin. distinguished by their ovoid shape and granular character on H&E [upper left and lower right; arrows]. Herring bodies represent intra-axonal accumulations of oxytocin- and vasopressin-containing granules en route to the posterior lobe. B.Herring bodies staining for vasopressin (immunostain, original magnification x100). that of the male. Among females, the gland is smaller in nulliparas than in multiparas. In pregnancy the gland enlarges significantly primarily as a result of lac-totroph cell hyperplasia. The anterior lobe comprises 80% of the pituitary and includes the pars distalis, interme-dia, and tuberalis. The body and stalk of the gland are sur-rounded by a delicate capsule derived from the meninges. Staining characteristics roughly divide the pars distalis into a central mucoid wedge and two lateral wings, zones best visualized in coronal and horizontal sections. By light microscopy, the cells of the anterior lobe show variation, not only in size and shape but also in their his-tochemical staining characteristics. They are arranged in nests, cords, and small acini bounded by an interlacing capillary network that is best seen on reticulin stain. This architectural pat-tern, altered in hyperplasia and conspicuously absent in adenomas, is of considerable diagnostic significance (see 1). The pars intermedia, poorly developed in humans, con-sists in large part of epithelium-lined spaces containing periodic acid-Schiff-positive colloid; the constituent Anterior lobe. An H&E-stained section shows chromo-phobic, acidophilic, and basophilic cells. Acidophils are most numerous in the lateral wings, whereas basophils are found in greatest number in the central or mucoid wedge. The different cell types are arranged in acinar formations that can be highlighted by reticulin stain (see . lobe, demonstrating acidophils, chromophobes, and basophils. Delicate nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, and variable cytoplasmic staining char-acterize normal cells and permit their distinction from adenoma cells. cells are ciliated, goblet, and a few endocrine; the last show variable immunoreactivity for pituitary hormones (Fig-ure12.25). These Rathke's cleft remnants, the vast majority of which are microscopic in size, are present in about 25% of pituitaries of autopsies. Cysts of the Rathke's cleft are usually incidental postmortem findings; symptomatic cysts are uncommon, representing about 5 to 9% of surgical lesions of the sellar region. In H&E-stained sections, three principal cell types are identified in the normal anterior lobe: Acidophils, basophils, and chromophobes -12.24). The designations reflect their staining affinities for acidic and basic dyes, with the chromophobic cells lacking affinity for either. These reactivities form the basis of an single layer of cuboidal to columnar epithelium that may be nonciliated, ciliated, mucin-producing, or granulated. The cyst contains an eosino-philic colloid. Preferential localization and relative frequency of func-tional anterior lobe cell types in the normal pituitary gland. Note that gonadotrophs, represented in the small gland (lower right), are distributed diffusely and show no preferential localization. outdated classification of pituitary adenomas that offers lit-tle in specifying their hormone content or endocrine func-tion. On the other hand, advances in immunohistochemis-try permit morphologic and functional correlation . Numerous cells in the central or mucoid wedge are basophilic and stain strongly via the PAS method. Such cells produce adrenocorticotropin and thyroid-stimulat-ing hormone. In contrast, most cells in the lateral wings are acidophilic and are engaged either in GH or, less frequently, in PRL production. The essential morphologic features of the five principal cell types and the biochemical characteristics of the six hormones of the anterior pituitary are summarized in Table 12.3. Their ultrastructural features are presented in Table 12.4. Somatotroph Cells Somatotrophs, or GH cells, occur in greatest density in the lateral wings and comprise approximately 50% of all adenohypophysial cells. A minority of somatotroph cells are scattered throughout the median portion of the gland. They are medium-sized, ovoid cells with round, centrally located nuclei, relatively prominent nucleoli, and with abundant acidophilic granules. Immuno-histochemical stains for GH shows strong and diffuse cytoplasm staining, consistent with the numerous secre-tory granules present at the ultrastructural level -12.28). Somatotroph cells are rather stable during life, and their number, morphology, and immunoreactivity are unchanged by age. The development of somatotrophs and GH transcription is determined by the expression of the nuclear transcription Q) .!::! en~_ ca Q)': Uenen=Q) y=z+ + +-' C Q.) ::J _J C'C "C Q.) c c CJ) E-::J ""C Q.) C'C ~ ~ +++++-++ Q)u+++ +-' C Q.) ::J _J C'C ::J Cl Q.) C'C "C Q.) c c CJ) E-::J ""C Q.) C'C ~ ~ +++-;_-C'C ::J CleE C _-0 C'Co>00 o 0, +-' C'Co0 'i:: Ln ~CJ) cCJ) CJ) 0>- Q.) CJ) 0 C>< ~ Q.) _, co C C C'C 0 ""C CJ) C C'C ::Jc« 0 ++ + +-' C Q.) ::J _J Q.) +-' C'C Cl Co 'P C'C>o +++++-++•C Q.)C ::.!. 0+ C"P+ ~ C'C+ Q.)EZ 0+ -+ + ~+ + ~+- C'C+><::J+. +-' C Q.) ::J _J C'C>o +++-++ "C +-' C Q.) Q.) C'C "C Q.) c cen ++++-+ ,: co +-'o'e ou Q.) c cen c co +-'o ""C C'C Coo +-' o In N CJ) CJ)o>-o><Q.) o C C'C Q.) c c CJ) Q.)E CJ)C Co Q.)o Cl'd" + 0 +~ +::.!.-+.s+en +-'-+C + ~+ "-+-§ +c +-' C Q.) ::J _J "C +-' C Q.) Q.) C'C ++ C'C ::Jcoo C ~ Q.) c c "C Q.) c >-"P C Q.) ::J t:Te - Eco C "~~03-cV;-c"-CJ) ~ Q.)+-' CJ)>-C Q.) 0 Cl ~ ""C Q.) CJ) Q.) c "~ ""C +t:+_g +en ""C Q.) Q.) t:: C'C CJ) CJ) Q.) Eo CJ)o CJ) .2:: "C +-' C Q.) Q.) C'C Q.) c cen +++-.s: co +-'o>-c I-CJ) Q.) Percentage of Cell Type Product Location Cells Histochemical Staining" Immunoperoxidase Staining Sornatotroph" GH; 21,000 dalton Lateral wings 50 Acidophilic; PAS GH polypeptide l.actotroph'' PRL;23,500 dalton Resting cells: Generalized; 15to 20 Acidophilic; PAS PRL polypeptide Secreting cells: Postero-lateral wings Corticotroph ACTH; 4507 dalton Mucoid wedge 15to 20 Basophilic; PAS and lead ACTH, I3-LPH, MSH, polypeptide hematoxylin endorphin, enkephalin Gonadotroph FSH &LH; 35,100 Generalized 10 Basophilic; PAS, lead I3-FSH,I3-LW, a-subunit and 28,260 dalton hematoxylin, aldehyde glycoprotein fuchsin, and aldehyde thionine Thyrotroph TSH; 28,000 dalton Anterior mucoid wedge <5 Same as for gonadotroph TSH, a-subunit glycoprotein "The tinctorial characteristics of normal pituitary cells depend on adequate cytoplasmic granulae storage. If sparsely granulated, cells that are otherwise functional may appear nonreactive or "chromophobic." bRare acidophillic stem cells are present in the normal pituitary. CMany gonadotrophs are capable of producing both FSH andLH,although immunohistochemical and ultrastructural evidence suggests that some gonadotrophs may produce only one hormone. GH,growth hormone; PRL, prolactin; ACTH, adrenocorticotrophic hormone; FSH &LH,follicle stimulating & luteinizing hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone. factor Pu-L. Five distinct genes on chromosome 17q22 encode GH and related proteins. Two alternatively spliced pep tides are produced by the pituitary GH gene, a 22-kDa GH and a less abun-dant 20-kDa GH molecule, both with similar biologic activ-ity. During pregnancy, placental syncytiotrophoblast cells express a GH variant gene, which plays a sig-nificant role in human fetal growth and development.The product of GH cells has extensive effects by direct action of GH and actions through mediators of hepatic origin called insulin-like growth factor-1. GH functions as the major promoter of growth but also in several other metabolic pathways, including glucose, insu-lin, and fatty acid. The pulsatile secretion of GH from the anterior lobe is under the control of the two hypothalamic regulatory hormones: Growth hormone releasing hormone philic and granular cytoplasm. Somatotrophs comprise 50% of anterior lobe cells. B.The strong GH staining reaction is a reflection of the numerous secretory granules present atthe ultrastruc-turallevel. prominent Golgi and numerous 200- to 500-nm secretory granules (orig-inal magnification x11,700). and somatostatin. The GHRH controls GH synthesis by regulating transcription of GH mRNA via control of intracellular cyclic AMP pathway. Somatostatin appears to determine the timing and ampli-tude of GH pulses but has no effect on GH synthesis. IGF-1 causes negative feedback inhibition of GH release by acting at the hypothalamus and the pituitary. Hypersecretion of GH in children causes gigantism, whereas its overproduction in adults leads to acromegaly. Lactotroph Cells Lactotrophs, or PRL cells, comprise approximately 20% of anterior pituitary cells and are concentrated in the poste-lobe cells. The majority are sparsely granulated, angular cells with pro-cesses that may wrap around adjacent cells. Many lactotrophs in this field show paranuclear staining, a pattern corresponding to PRL in the Golgi apparatus. Sparsely granulated PRL cell. Note the abundant cister-nae of rough endoplasmic reticulum and the prominent Golgi complex containing pleomorphic developing granules. Mature PRL granules range in size from 200 to 350 nm. rior portions of the lateral wings. Histologically, they appear either acidophilic or chromophobic. Chromophobic cells are more numer-ous, possess elongate processes, and, despite an abundance of endoplasmic reticulum and well-developed Golgi com-plexes, contain relatively few cytoplasmic granules -12.30, and Table 12.4). Densely granulated lacto-trophs are thought to represent a storage phase, whereas sparsely granulated cells are engaged in active secretion. A characteristic pattern of PRL staining of lactotrophs by immunohistochemistry, the so-called "Golgi pattern," is the presence of paranuclear staining corresponding to PRL in the Golgi apparatus. With the exception of pregnancy and lactation, there is no significant difference in PRL cell number between males and females. The doubling in volume of the pituitary during pregnancy is because of striking hyperplasia as well as hypertrophy of chromophobic lactotrophs, termed preg-nancy cells. They persist until shortly after delivery or the termination of lactation. PRL cell hyperplasia also may accompany estrogen administration and hypothyroidism. The existence of mammosomatotrophs, cells engaged in PRL and GH production and possessing unique ultra-structural features, attests to the existence of a histogenetic relationship between PRL and GH cells. PRL secretion is unique among the anterior pituitary hormones in that it is under tonic hypothalamic inhibi-tion by dopamine (hypothalamic PRL-inhibitory factor, or PI F) produced by tuberoinfundibular dopamine neurons. Dopamine type 2 receptors in lactotrophs mediate PRL inhibition. Several PRL-releasing factors participate in PRL secretion, including TRH and vasoactive intesti-nal peptide. Glucocorticoids, thyroid hormone and a fragment of GnRH weakly suppress PRL secretion. PRL synthesis is also regulated by effects of estrogen on PRL gene expression. and are mainly located in the mucoid wedge. By H&E stain, corticotrophs are basophilic cells with ovoid to polyhedral shape and central nucleus. Many have a small vacuole near the nucleus, representing a massive lysosome. B.Note the clustering of cells, a characteristic feature of corticotrophs. Disruption of the hypothalamus or the hypothalamic-hypophysial stalk may impede dopamine delivery to the anterior lobe, causing hyperprolactinemia, a phenomenon termed "stalk effect." This regulatory pathway accounts for the spontaneous PRL hypersecretion often secondary to compressive space-occupying sellar or parasellar mass (eg, pituitary macroadenoma, Rathke's cleft cyst, craniopharyn-gioma, or glioma) that compresses the pituitary stalk. PRL acts through specific PRL receptors in multiple tis-sues, including breast, liver, ovary, testis, and prostate. The main site of PRL action is in the breast, where induces and maintains lactation stimulating the formation of casein, lact-albumin, lipids, and carbohydrates, all essential components of breast mille During pregnancy, high levels of estrogen, pro-gesterone, placental lactogen, and PRL induce acinar develop-ment and promote milk formation. As previously noted, milk secretion is under the control of oxytocin, a potent stimulator of myoepithelial cell contraction in breast tissue. PRL also decreases reproductive function and suppress sexual drive by suppressing hypothalamic GnRH and pituitary gonadotropins secretion and impairing gonadal steroidogenesis. In patients with hyperprolactinemia, besides galactor-rhea, decrease libido and reduce fertility are common clini-cal symptoms. Corticotroph Cells Corticotrophs, or ACTH cells, comprise 15 to 20% of ade-nohypophysial cells and are most numerous in the mid- and posterior portions of the mucoid wedge. Histologically, corticotroph cells are polygonal, medium- to large-sized, and basophilic. A paranuclear vacuole that corresponds to one or several lysosomal struc-tures at the ultrastructural level is typically seen in the cyto-plasm. Corticotroph cells are strong PAS positive because of a carbohydrate moiety contained in proopiomelanocortin, the precursor molecule of ACTH. In immunostained preparations, corticotrophs show strong and diffuse cytoplasm ACTH staining consistent with the numerous secretory granules present at the ultrastructural level. Corticotrophs may also contain other POMC derivatives, including ~-lipotropin, melanocyte-stimulating hormone, endorphin, and encephalin which are not of significance in the daily practice of surgical pathology. Perinuclear bundles cal large lysosome and spherical to slightly pleomorphic and variably electron-dense secretory granules measuring 150to 450 nm. Bundles of intermediate filaments are a regular feature of corticotrophs. The adjacent cells with small granules are likely TSH cells (original magnification x8250). of cytokeratin filaments are also a characteristic feature of ACTH cells. Under conditions of glucocorti-coid excess, either exogenous or endogenous, corticotrophs accumulate cytokeratin as a manifestation of Crooke's hya-line change. ACTH, the principal product of corticotrophs, is part of a larger precursor molecule, the POMC, which is enzy-matically cleaved in the anterior pituitary into ~-LPH and ACTH. In the intermediate lobe, ACTH is cleaved into MSH and corticotropin-like intermediate lobe pro-tein. ACTH stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and androgens. It plays a critical role in both the transport of amino acids and glucose into muscle, as well as the stimulation of insu-lin release from the pancreas. Pituitary ACTH secretion is regulated by hypothalamic CRH and arginine vasopressin Crooke's hyaline change. A.Crooke's cells larrows) are characterized by a conspicuous eosinophilic perinuclear ring consisting of cytokeratin IH&E, original magnification xl00). B.ACTH stains show central displacement of the nucleus and organ-elles by filament accumulation IACTH immunostain, original magnifi-cation xl00). C.Staining for cytokeratin show strong reactivity of the Crooke's cells ICC immunostain, original magnification xl00) and proinflammatory cytokines, including IL-6, as well as leukemia inhibitory factor. Excess secretion of ACTH, such as occurs in Cushing's disease, leads to stereotypic abnormalities such as truncal obesity, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, amenorrhea, hir-sutism, muscle atrophy, striae, impaired wound healing, and mental status changes. Hyperpigmentation also may occur in this setting and is because of the effects of MSH. Thyrotroph Cells Thyrotrophs, or TSH cells, are located primarily in the ante-rior part of the mucoid wedge and comprise only 5% of ade-nohypophysial cells. They are medium sized and angu-lar or elongate. Like corticotrophs, normal TSH cells are basophilic and are PAS positive (see Table 12.4 for ultrastructural features). adjacent to a corticotroph cell adenoma displays massive accumula-tion of cytokeratin filament. Secretory granules are displaced to the perinuclear zone or to the periphery of the cytoplasm. Note the large lysosome in the lower portion ofthe field. Thyroid-stimulating hormone, like the other two glycoprotein hormones of the pituitary, consists of two non-covalently bound subunits, alpha and beta; the a-subunit is common to all three glyco-protein hormones; the ~-subunit is specific for each hor-mone and confers biologic specificity. TSH binds to thyroid cells, inducing RNA and protein synthesis and thereby the production of thyroglobulin and thyroid hormones. Secre-tion of TSH is regulated by both hypothalamic hormones and circulating thyroid hormones. Thyrotropin-releasing hormone stimulates TSH release, while thyroid hor-mones, dopamine, somatostatin, and glucocorticoids inhibit TSH secretion. In the setting of primary hypothyroidism, thyrotrophs undergo hypertrophy and hyperplasia. When excessive, the angulated cells with some demonstrating elongate processes. They comprise only about 5% of anterior lobe secretory cells and show strong TSH immunoreactivity (TSH immunostain, original magnification x100). Thyrotroph. This micrograph of the normal anterior pituitary shows the characteristic elongate thyrotrophs, the large Iysosomes frequently observed in cells of this type, and small peripherally located secretory granules. Part of a Crooke's cell is also shown. response may produce sufficient hypertrophy of the pituitary gland to mimic adenoma. Pituitary adenomas that elaborate TSH are rare; most occur in the setting of hypothyroidism, although a minority results in hyperthyroidism. Gonadotroph Cells Gonadotrophs, or FSH and LH cells, comprise 10% of the adenohypophysis, show a strong affinity for both basic and PAS stains, and generally are evenly distributed throughout the anterior lobe. Immunohistochemical and ultrastructural studies have shown that FSH and LH may be produced in isolation or by the same cell. Like TSH, facture both LH and FSH. The paucity of strongly staining cells in this field reflects the fact that only 10% of anterior lobe secretory cells are gonadotrophs. appearance of the cell is typical of gonadotrophs. Their spherical and slightly irregular secretory granules are characteristic; they have vari-able electron density and measure 250 to 400 nm. The cell process sur-rounding the gonadotroph likely belongs to a thyrotroph (original mag-nification x8250). LH and FSH are glycoprotein hormones consisting of a-and ~-subunits. In the daily practice of surgical pathology, monoclonal antibodies against the specific ~-subunits of LH and FSH are universally applied. In addition, antibodies against the a-subunit are useful for determination of abnor-mal production and/or secretion of this subunit hormone. Both LH and FSH play distinct but essential roles in the reproductive physiology of males and females. In the female, LH is required for ovulation and follicular luteinization. In males, it stimulates interstitial Leydig cells to produce tes-tosterone. Follicle-stimulating hormone promotes follicular development in the female, whereas in the male it induces Sertoli cells to produce an androgen-binding protein. Secretion of these hormones from the gonadotroph cells is regulated by integration of the GnRH signal and feed-back effects of gonadal steroids and the peptides inhibin, follistatin, and activin. Hypothalamic GnRH interacts with a membrane receptor to regulate both LH and FSH release and synthesis necessary for gonadotroph cells' func-tion. FSH synthesis is also under separate control by the gonadal peptides inhibin and activin, members of the trans-forming growth factor ~ family. Inhibin selectively suppresses FSH, whereas activin stimulates FSH synthesis. In addition, estrogens act at both hypothalamic and pitu-itary levels to control gonadotropins secretion. Par Tuberalis The pars tuberalis, an upward extension of the anterior lobe along the pituitary stalk, is composed of normal acini of pituitary cells scattered among surface portal vessels. These cells consist of mainly gonadotrophs intermixed with a few corticotrophs and thyrotrophs, histologically resembling those of pars distalis. They often show immunoreactivity for ACTH, FSH, LH, and a-subunit. Although in functional terms they mayor may not differ Anterior pituitary, pars tuberalis. Squamous metaplasia of secretory cells is a common feature of this portion of the gland. from similar cells in the pars distalis, these cells do show a distinct tendency to undergo squamous metaplasia. Follicles are not an uncommon feature of the normal anterior pituitary. Their functional constituent cells, termed follicular cells, appear to be derived in large part from vari-ous secretory cells. Ultrastructurally, they are often poorly granulated or agranular and linked by apical junctional complexes. Within follicular lumina, one often finds cellular debris. The stimulus for folli-cle formation is, therefore, thought to be damage or rupture of anterior lobe secretory cells. Folliculostellate Cells The folliculostellate cell is the sixth cellular element of the adenophypophysis, a specialized sustentacular-like cell that appears to have multiple functions related to phagocytosis, secretion of growth factors, and intercellular communica-tion. They comprise of less than 5% of the anterior lobe cells, are scattered about the anterior lobe, and con-tribute to the formation of anterior lobe follicles and cysts of the intermediate lobe. They are readily identified by their immunoreactivity for S-l 00 protein, and can also be identified by glial fibrillary acidic protein and vimentin. They participate in regulating several activities of anterior pituitary including scavenger activity by engulfing degenerated cells and paracrine regulation of endocrine cells through the production of cytokines (such as interleukin-6, and leukemia inhibitory factor) and various growth factors (including basic fibroblast growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor). Additionally, ultra-structural and immunohistochemical studies on human adenomatous and non-neoplastic pituitary folliculostel-late cells suggest that they may represent an adult organ-specific stem cells. material, are commonly found in the anterior lobe. B.Follicles show promi-nent apical staining for epithelial membrane antigen. Variation in Normal Morphology of the Adenohypophysis A number of normal histologic variations in the pituitary gland may mimic clinically significant lesions. Examples include squamous cell nests in the pars tuberalis, basophil follicle contains cell debris within its lumen. The gonadotroph, but not the corticotroph, is part of this follicle. Follicles are composed of granulated adenohypophysial cells that, through the formation of junc-tional complexes, surround damaged adenohypophysial cells.invasion of the posterior lobe, granular cell clusters and tumorlets of the stalk and neurohypophysis, and salivary gland rests. Squamous cell nests show a definite predilection for the pars tuberalis; they have been found in up to 24% of cells comprise less than 5% of anterior lobe cells and are scattered throughout the pituitary, including the intermediate lobe zone. Follicu-lostellate cells staining for S-100 protein, GFAP, and vimentin (S-100 immunostain, original magnification xl00). stance of the posterior lobe. B.The invading cells are strongly immunoreac-tive for ACTH and other POMC derivate hormones. autopsy cases, occur more commonly in elderly patients, and show no sex predilection. They arise through a process of metaplastic transformation from adenohypo-physial cells, as evidenced by simultaneous expression of keratin and pituitary hormones, most often FSH, LH, or ACTH. Because squamous metaplasiaalso may accompany foci of ischemic infarction in the ante-rior lobe, it appears to be an inherent property of pituitary secretory cells. Basophil invasion consists of corticotrophic basophils extending from the pars intermedia into the neurohypophy-sis. Basophilic invasion is more magnification x63). composed of a single layer of cuboidal to columnar epithelium with basally oriented nuclei and granular PAS-positive cytoplasm. Salivary gland rests are encountered both on the surface of or within the pos-terior lobe, where it abuts the intermediate lobe zone jH&E, original magnification x63). common in males and the elderly, and may at first glance mimic an adenoma. Similar to ordinary corticotrophs, these basophilic cells are immunoreactive for ACTH, and other POMC derivatives; however, they contain few cytokeratin filaments and are less susceptible to Crooke's hyalinization in response to hypercortisolism. Salivary gland rests appear as tubular glands upon the surface or in the substance of the neurohypophysis, often just posterior to the pars intermedia. They are composed of a single layer of cuboidal to columnar epi-thelium with basally oriented nuclei and finely granular, strongly PAS-positive cytoplasm. Salivary gland rests are often oncocytic. Their ultrastructural features include well-developed rough endoplasmic reticulum, secretory drop-lets, microvilli, and desmosomes, all of which support the contention that they are indeed salivary glands. Age-related Changes of the Adenohypophysis The cytology of the anterior pituitary varies with age. For instance, the late fetal or term pituitary gland shows PRL cell hyperplasia, a reflection of high maternal estrogen levels. Also, when compared with the adult pituitary, the prepuber-tal gland shows gonadotrophic cells to be poorly developed. The gland weight remains stable throughout adult life, decreasing only slightly in the elderly associated with inter-stitial and perivascular fibrosis. Preg-nancy is the period in which the adenohypophysis undergoes major changes resulting in a doubling of its weight because of gradual increase in large chromophobic PRL cells ("preg-nancy cells"). The increase in PRL-producing cells during pregnancy appears to result not only from proliferation of PRL cells but also from recruitment of mammosomatotroph cells to enhance PRL production. Lactotroph hyperplasia gradually disappears within months The pituitary in pregnancy features abundant pale chromophobic PRL cells jH&E, original magnification xl00). after delivery or abortion. The process is often incomplete; hence, the pituitaries of multiparas are larger than those of women who were never pregnant. Pregnancy also results in a significant decrease of gonadotropin immunoreactivity, a reflection of the production of gonadotropic hormones by the placenta. The effects of aging on the cellular contents of several pituitary hormones have been studied. Specifically, GH and PRL cells have been shown to undergo no significant decrease in number, granularity, distribution, or immunoreac-tivitywith increasing age. Both ACTH and TSH cells also appear to be unaffected by age, but no data are available regarding the effects of senescence on FSH and LH cells. Fibrosis is the most frequent age-related change. It is generally perivascular in distribution but is on occasion patchy, suggesting a remote microinfarct. Interstitial and intracellular deposits of amyloid have been demonstrated in the majority of autopsy-derived anterior pituitaries. Immunohistochemically, these reacted for pituitary jH&E, original magnification xl00). anti-amyloid lambdalight chain and amyloid P com-ponent. The mean volume percentage of such deposits is approximately 0.5% of the anterior lobe. The occurrence of amyloid and its degree of deposition was related not only to patient age but also to the prevalence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and to non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Neurohypophysis As a functional unit, the neurohypophysis consists of the infundibulum, pituitary stalk, and posterior lobe. The poste-rior lobe, a ventral extension of the central nervous system, is the site of release of the hypothalamic hormones oxytocin and vasopressin. Its cellular elements consist of: 1. unmy-elinated axons originating from the SON and PVN and, to a lesser extent, from cholinergic neurons of the hypothala-mus; 2. an extensive vascular network; and 3. specialized glial cells termed pituicytes. Pituicytes, the most numerous cells of the neurohy-pophysis, are elongated, uni- or bipolar cells that display the prolongation of the cytoplasm into one or more pro-cesses. Pituicytes appear to exist in five principal forms: Major, dark, ependymal, oncocytic, and granular. Their morphologic diversity is thought to be a reflection of their, still not completely understood, physiologic roles. Pituicytes are positive for GFAP, as well as S-100 protein and vimentin. Similar to glial cells of other areas of the central nervous system, pituicytes expand processes to adjacent connective tissue or to a blood vessel wall. Pituicytes are embryologically derivated from the floor of the diencephalon, an area under the influence of TIF-l expression during normal development. Expression of TTF-l in normal fetal and adult, and neoplastic pituicytes has been recently recognized.The axons of the posterior lobe are histologically identi-fied using silver stains and/or immunostains for neuronal markers. Focal axonal dilatations, known as Herring bod-ies, represent intra-axonal accumulations of posterior lobe hormones. At the ultrastructural level, the unmyelinated axons appear as delicate fibers, measuring 0.05 to 1.0 11m in diameter, which contain longitudinal arrays of microtubules and neurofilaments. Two types of neurosecretory axons, A and B, have been described based on the morphology of their neurosecretory granules. Type A fibers, far more numerous than type B, contain 100- to 300-nm oxytocin and vasopressin granules, whereas type B fibers, likely aminergic in nature, contain granules rang-ing from 50 to 100 nm. Neurosecretory fibers are closely associated with pituicytes, their axons often being ensheathed by them. The most important function of the neurohypophysis is the transfer of hormonal substances from neurosecretory granules to the intravascular space. The complex anatomy of the neuronal, vascular, and perivascular compartments forms the basis for this elaborate process. Beginning at the neuronal side, neurohormonal factors appear to be released into minute channels that traverse the outermost, or ablu-minal, basement membrane of vessels to communicate with the perivascular space. They then traverse the inner, or luminal, basement membrane and endothelium in order to gain access to the vascular space. Variation in Normal Morphology of the Neurohypophysis Granular cell nests or tumorlets, most located in the stalk or posterior lobe, are found in about 6% of autopsy pituitar-ies and are more common among the elderly. Varying from scattered cells to compact tumor-like nodules, they rohypophysis. B.These cells stain positively for glial fibrillary acid protein WFAP immunostain, original magnification xl00). shows axonal processes containing neurosecretory granules of vary-ing electron density. A granular pituicyte containing numerous prominent Iysosomes lies in close proximity to the intravascular space. The intravascular space is bounded by fenestrated endothelial cells as seen here. Outside the endothelium lies the perivascular space, a region containing a variety of cell types, including pericytes, histiocytes, fibroblasts, and mast cells (original magnifica-tionx6200).are composed of plump cells with granular acidophilic and strongly PAS-positive cytoplasm and relatively small nuclei. Only rarely do granular cells form clinically significant tumors. The origin of granular cell tumor-lets and tumors of the neurohypophysis is uncertain, but the occasional GFAP immunoreactivity has provided some evidence of the hypothesis that these granular cell nests may originate from pituicytes.