Prenatal Development The morphology of developing adipose tissue has been studied in detail. By examining serial sections obtained from 805 human fetuses of various ages, Poissonnet et al. have determined that prior to the second trimester of pregnancy, adipose tissue primordia cannot be identified by light microscopy. After 14 weeks' gestation, aggregates of mesenchymal cells are seen condensed around proliferat-ing primitive blood vessels. They refer to these findings as stage II in the development of adipose tissue. Prior to this time, future adipose tissue is characterized by loose spindle cells and ground substance. Later on, capillaries continue to proliferate into a rich network, around which preadipocytes become stellate and orga-nized into a mesenchymal lobule. These preadi-pocytes do not contain lipid. With further development, fine lipid vacuoles characteristic of stage IV accumulate within cytoplasm. Continued proliferation of the components of the lobule results in the formation ofdensely packed aggregates of vacuolated fat cells with a rich capillary vascular network. Finally, condensation of peril-obular mesenchyme at the periphery of the lobule results in formation of fibrous interlobular septa in stage V This process occurs over the 10-week period between the 14-and 24-week gestation periods. From approximately 24 to 29 weeks, the number of fat lobules is relatively constant. Continued growth occurs mainly because of proliferation of capillaries and adipocytes, causing an increase in the size of the fat lobules. The same sequence of development of adipose tissue occurs at all sites throughout the body. The earliest white fat lobules appear first in the face, neck, breast, and abdominal wall at 14 weeks' gestation. By 15 weeks, they are also evident over the back and shoulders. Development in the upper and lower extremities and anterior chest begins around the sixteenth week. By the end of the twenty-third week, a layer of subcutaneous fat completely covers the extremities. There is a very close association of adipocyte devel-opment and angiogenesis. Fat appears first in well-vascularized regions, such as the shoulder joint, before differentiation can be identified in the less well-supplied adjacent subcutaneous tissue. There is also an important physiologic significance to this close anatomic relationship. Lipoprotein lipase, the hormone responsible for transfer of triglyceride from circulating lipoproteins to adipose tissue, is synthesized by adipocytes and transferred to the luminal surface of the capillary endothelium. Thus, this close stage I Developmental stages of adipose tissue. Stage I: Stellate cells embedded in amorphous ground substance. Stage II:As angio-genesis begins, mesenchymal cells condense around the blood vessels. Stage III:A rich capillary network develops from each vessel, forming a glomerulus-like network around which each lobule forms. The preadipocytes become more stellate. Stage IV: With accumulation of lipid, these adipocytes, with multiple small lipid droplets, become closely packed around the capillaries. Stage V: Further accumulation of lipid with many unilocular cells is evident. The perilobular mesenchyme condenses into interlobular septa at this stage.\ \ \ Stage IV B.At high power, both univacuolated and multivacuolated cells are noted together with small capillaries. C and O.By 37 weeks, the lobules are more developedand many of the cells are univacuolated. spatial relationship provides efficient transfer of enzyme and lipid. Because of this close developmental association of cap-illaries and adipocytes, some have proposed that the adi-pocyte precursor, or preadipocyte, actually is derived from endothelial cells. Others have felt that the preadipocyte may be a perivascular reticulum cell, perivascular fibroblast-like cell, or undifferentiated mesenchymal cell. The pre-sumptive adipocyte precursor has been characterized ultra-structurally in the newborn rat. The preadipocyte is aspindle cell with four to five cytoplasmic extensions along its long axis and abundant rough endoplasmic reticulum. Lipid accumulates first as small droplets adjacent to the nucleus. As more lipid appears, it coalesces into a single large vacuole, and the cell takes on an oval then, finally, a round shape. The amount of rough ER decreases as the cell matures. Although cell shape and abundance of rough ER were taken as supportive evidence for the common origin of the preadipocyte and the fibroblast, which has a simi-lar ultrastructural appearance, these similarities may have been a coincidence. The immature adipocyte needs to syn-thesize and excrete lipoprotein lipase-thus the abundant rough ER. Fibroblasts synthesizing and secreting procolla-gen would be expected to have a similar array of organelles. As the preadipocyte accumulates lipid to become an adipocyte, both multilocular and unilocular adipocytes can be seen. Multilocular adipocytes predominate at first. With further lipid accumulation, more cells assume the unilocu-lar appearance characteristic of mature adipocytes. Thus, attempts to differentiate brown from white adipocyte tissue at the light microscopic level, which rely on the presence of multivacuolated cells to characterize and identify brown fat, are not reliable. Reliance on ultrastructural and biochemi-cal differences helps distinguish between these different forms of adipose tissue. Molecular Biology Through work on the adipocytic neoplasm known as "myx-oidliposarcoma," at least one gene involved in adipo-cytic differentiation has been identified. The translocation t of that tumor disrupts the normal func-tion of the CHOP gene found at 12q13. First, the CHOP gene was shown to be rearranged in nearly all MLS, and, subsequently, the actual breakpoint was cloned. The CHOP gene, also known as GADD153, encodes a member of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein family and has a DNA-binding domain. It appears to be involved in normal adipocyte differentiation because the protein it produces may be a dominant inhibitor of other C/EBP tran-scription factors known to be important in cell proliferation. Members of this C/EBP group are highly expressed in fat and are involved in the differentiation of fibroblasts into adipocytes and in the growth arrest of terminally differenti-ated adipocytes. CHOP itself is induced in the differ-entiation of 3T3- L 1 cells to adipocytes. In the neoplasm, the translocation results in a fusion gene involving CHOP and TLS, an RNA-binding gene with much similarity structurally and functionally to theEWS gene of Ewing's sarcoma. Presumably, the lack of the normal inhibitory function of an intact CHOP gene allows the fatty tumor to proliferate unchecked. The use of both Southern blots and fluorescent in situ hybridation techniques in detecting the rearranged gene will have usefulness in the diagnosis of fatty tumors. Likewise, when it becomes commercially available, antibody to the CHOP protein might be used immunohistochemically to detect such tumors. Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, probably occurs in adipocytic tissues, but studies localizing the bcl-2 protein in human fetal tissues fail to mention its detection in fat. Postnatal Development At birth, the average-size infant has approximately 5 bil-lion adipocytes. This represents only 16% of the total number of adipocytes in adults. Adipose tissue continuesto grow in parallel with general growth throughout the first 10 years of life. Fat cells enlarge significantly during the first 6 months of life without much increase in cell number. Until puberty, the cell size remains fairly constant while the number of adipocytes progressively increases. At puberty, there is a substantial increase in adipocyte size and num-ber. Although at the end of puberty, the total number of adipocytes is similar to the adult, new adipocytes may continue to form throughout life. Studies on adult rats have shown that overfeeding results in proliferation of adi-pocyte precursors and development of new fat cells. De novo adipocyte formation can be triggered by overdis-tension of existing fat cells and the mass of stored triglyc-erides. Loss of fat cells may also occur and has been shown in overweight women following several years of strict dietary restriction. Adult white adipose tissue may be a source of mesen-chymal stem cells, which can differentiate into mul-tiple lineages including adipose cells, chondrocytes, osteo-blasts, neuronal cells, endothelial cells, and cardiomyocytes. Gender Differences The differences in body fat content noted between men and women begin in early childhood. Young girls are fat-ter than boys. Studies on fetuses, however, have not noted differences in the pattern of distribution or quantity of fat in prenatal life. The distribution of adipose tissue, how-ever, even in prenatal life is not homogeneous throughout the body. Gender differences in the distribution of adipose tissue following puberty are well-known and thought to be related to steroid hormone secretion. In humans, estrogens and progesterone induce an increase in trochan-teric fat. The localization of more fat in the lower body in women results in the so-called gynecoid habitus. These same deposits are reduced by androgens in men, resulting in an android distribution of fat. The percentage of body fat also differs in men and women. Males reach a peak in body fat content during early adolescence, whereas women con-tinue to accumulate fat relative to body weight throughout the teen years. Functions White adipose tissue is the body's largest energy store and it possesses the enzymes necessary for the uptake and release of triglycerides. Briefly, triglycerides circulate in the blood in the form of chylomicrons from the intestine and very low-density lipoproteins from the liver. Lipoprotein lipase present on the luminal surface of endothelial cells hydrolyzes the triglyceride to release free fatty acids. This enzyme is synthesized by adipocytes and transferred to the endothelial cells. Most of the free fatty acids are taken up by the fat cells and reesterified to glycerol phosphate within the adipocyte to form triacylglycerol, which is then stored within the cell's lipid droplet. The fat is mobilized through the action of hormone-sensitive lipase, which hydrolyzes stored triglycerides. The released free fatty acids may be reesterified or released to the circulation and bound to albu-min for transfer to other cells. Until recently, the main endocrine function of adipose tissue was thought to be the conversion of androstenedione to estrone, the major source of estrogen in men and post-menopausal women. The aromatase action, however, has been localized to the stromal cell fraction of adipose tissue and not the adipocyte. More recently, a dynamic role of adipose tissue has emerged with expression of several hormones, growth factors, and cytokines identified in adi-pocytes, stromal cells, and macrophages that are localized to adipose tissue. These include leptin, a regulator of energy expenditure and appetite; interleukin-6, which may playa role in the metabolic syndrome; and several important regulators of glucose and lipid metabolism, the complement cascade, and the fibrinolytic system. Leptin, the protein product of the obgene, is syn-thesized exclusively by adipocytes and acts on the hypo-thalamus to increase energy expenditure and decrease appetite. This pathway is well-established in rats. In humans, fasting lowers serum leptin levels and increases appetite. Unfortunately, elevated or rising levels of leptin do not show the reverse effect, and leptin has not been shown to have an antiobesity action in humans. The majority of obese individuals have elevated serum leptin levels, proportional to the amount of adipose tissue, and it is postulated that humans are leptin resistant. Leptin receptors are present on most tissues, and leptin may playa role outside the adipose tissue to accelerate wound healing, increase vascular tone, and inhibit bone formation. Cytokines are secreted by adipocytes, stromal cells, and resident macrophages. IL-6 is made by adipocytes and mac-rophages, and adipose tissue accounts for approximately 30% of circulating IL-6 in humans. Like leptin, serum IL-6 levels are highly correlated with percent body fat. The IL-6 released from intra-abdominal stores enters the portal circulation. Hepatic triglyceride secretion is stimulated by IL-6, and this may contribute to the hypertriglyceridemia seen with visceral obesity. IL-6 also stimulates hepatic secretion of acute phase reactants, increases platelet num-ber and activity, and increases expression of endothelial adhesion molecules. There are ongoing investigations of the role this cytokine (which is derived in large part from adi-pose tissue) plays in the metabolic syndrome and the risk of cardiovascular disease in obesity. Adipocytes also secrete C3 and adipsin, the proteins of the alternate complement pathway. Plasminogen acti-vator inhibitor-I is a potent inhibitor of the fibri-nolytic system and favors the development of thromboem-boli. Insulin induces expression of PAl-1 by adipocytes, and elevated levels are seen with obesity. Mitochondrial dysfunction in adipocytes may be related to the development of obesity and the diabetes epidemicand appears to be involved IIIHIV-treatment associated lipodystrophy. Regulation White adipose tissue contains numerous receptors for hor-mones, cytokines, catecholamines, and lipoproteins. Cat-echolamines acting through a-2 receptors inhibit lipoly-sis, and a predominance of a-2 receptors in gluteal fat of women is thought to impact maintenance of these fat stores despite weight loss. Regional differences in lipopro-tein lipase levels also occur in women. Gluteal fat in premenopausal women tends to have high LPL levels, and these regions contain larger fat cells. Such regional dif-ferences disappear after menopause and are not present in obese men. This suggests that the sex steroids also playa role in adipose tissue distribution and activity. Both androgens and estrogen modulate obgene expression and control adipose tissue development. Androgens are antiadipogenic and estrogens proadipogenic. These may playa role in the regional differences in fat distribution and the development of the android and gynecoid patterns of obesity. Insulin stimulates lipogenesis and glucose uptake while inhibiting fat breakdown. Insulin and glucocorticoids stim-ulate DNA synthesis in cultured human adipocytes and conversion of preadipocytes to mature adipocytes. These effects are enhanced on cells obtained from obese, as com-pared with lean, people. Estradiol-1 7~ has also been shown to stimulate division of cultured preadipocytes obtained from both men and women. Progesterone acts in vitro to stimulate both preadipocyte division and LPL activity. This dual role facilitates triglyceride accumulation in women. Fibroblast growth factor 1, secreted by adipose-derived microvascular endothelial cells, stimulates pre-adipocyte differentiation and accumulation of triglycerides. Tumor necrosis factor alpha and IL-6 have the opposite effect and are implicated along with leptin in the weight loss and anorexia of chronic wasting illnesses and cancer. TNF-a is expressed in preadipocytes and acts to block differentiation to mature adipocytes through CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha. It also suppresses lipoprotein lipase and stimulates the mobi-lization of fatty acids. The TNF-a induces the release of IL-6 and leptin from adipose tissue, and the action of these cytokines is closely interrelated. In addition to adipocyte function, fat cell size and num-ber are also regulated. Numerous studies using tritiated thymidine incorporation as a marker for cell division in adi-pose tissue have been done in rats to identify mitotically active cells within fat. Mature lipid-laden adipocytes are generally considered to be incapable of cell differentiation because of the absence of mitotic figures seen histologically in normal adipose tissue. Sampling fat from rats injected with tritiated thymidine at 1 day and 3 days of age, which are then sacrificed at various times up to 5 months of age, has shown that the number of labeled cells in subcutane-ous fat initially rises because of cell proliferation. The con-centration of radioactivity then falls, probably as a result of a dilutional effect resulting from continued cell division. This study, however, failed to distinguish adipocyte from stromal labeling. Similar studies had been performed on rats in which the subcutaneous tissue is separated into stromal and adipose components. In one study, the specific radioactivity of the adipocyte fraction did not increase until 2 to 5 days after injection. Thus, they concluded that DNA synthesis occurs in non-lipid-Iaden cells or preadi-pocytes. As these cells accumulate lipid, labeled cells are detected within the adipocyte fraction. Gross Aspects Fatty tissue is typically a homogeneous, bright cadmium-like yellow, with a glistening and greasy surface texture, and finely divided by faint septa. Any variation in color indicates a pathologic process: White to white/yellow in fat necrosis, paler yellows in many lipomas, reddish tinge to orange/yel-low in angiolipoma, definite gray/white to whitish streaks in spindle cell lipoma, and white/yellow to white nodules in liposarcoma. Histology Microscopically, a mature white fat cell is spherical and measures up to 120 11min diameter. The cytoplasm is compressed at the perimeter of the cell, and only a thin rim of cell membrane is evident on hematoxylin-eosin-stained sections. Reticulin and periodic acid-Schiff stains highlight the adipocyte basement membrane . The cytoplasm is displaced by a single lipid vacuole, and the cells are fairly uniform in size. Thenucleus, although oval, is thin and small with finely dis-tributed chromatin; when seen in profile, a central minute clear vacuole may be seen within the nucleus. Normal subcutaneous fat is finely divided into ill-defined lobules by thin bands of collagen. UItrastru ctu re The ultrastructure of developing adipocytes has previously been discussed. In brief, a spindle shape with abundant ER and small spherical mitochondria characterizes pre-adipocytes. Lipid accumulates as small perinuclear inclusions that coalesce to form larger lipid droplets. The mitochondria become filamentous and the ER less promi-nent. In a mature adipocyte, the nucleus is flattened against the cytoplasmic membrane by a large lipid droplet. There is only a thin, tenuous rim of cytoplasm that surrounds it. Pinocytotic vesicles are seen in variable numbers but are very numerous following periods of starvation. Adjacent to the cell membrane are deposits of basement membrane. Capillaries are closely opposed to the adipocyte basement membrane. Only rarely have nerves been identified adja-cent to white fat cells, although they may be seen in inter-cellular collagenous septa.