The majority of the skin lesions can be diagnosed with well-prepared H&E-stained sections. However, they will not provide an adequate answer in all cases. A comprehensive review of "special stains" is beyond the scope of this chapter because every case is different and may require a specific approach. The following are the most common stains used in our laboratory in the study of cutaneous tissue. the spaces after multiple sections were performed. PAS: To study the thickness of the basement mem-brane, for glycogen and fungal organ-isms 2. Comori's methenamine silver: For fungal organisms and cutaneous Pneumocystis cariniil. 3.Ziehl-Neels en and Fite stains: For acid-fast organisms 4.Gram's stains: For bacteria 5.Steiner and Warthin-Starry stains: In cases of bacil-lary angiomatosis and for spirochetes, although the later immunohistochemical method is preferred 6.Giemsa: For mast cells and protozoan organisms, such asLeishmania 7. Mucicarmine: For mucin 8. Alcian blue: For acid mucopolysaccharides and sulfated mucopolysaccharides 9. Congo red: For amyloid 10. Elastic van Gieson: For elastic fibers 11. Fontana-Masson: For melanin 12. Von Kossa: For calcium Immunofluorescence plays an important role in the diag-nosis and evaluation of skin disorders such as lupus ery-thematosus, vasculitis, and autoimmune blistering diseases. Specimens are provided to the laboratory either immedi-ately following biopsy on saline-soaked gauze or preferable in Michel's transport medium. Michel's transport medium is not a fixative, but a solution which stabilizes proteins for immunofluorescence. It is made up of citric acid, ammo-nium sulfate, n-ethylmaleimide, and magnesium sulfate and maintains at room temperature the isotonicity and pH of the tissue. Specimens that have been fixed in formalin generally are not able to be processed for immu-nofluorescent studies. Specimens that have been placed in Michel's transport medium and then processed for rou-tine H&E staining show a recognizable artifact in which there is a loss of nuclear detail. Immunofluorescent studies are either direct, using the patient's tissue, or indirect, using the serum of patients and a control tissue containing the relevant target molecules. Direct immunofluorescent studies are performed on cryostat sections of skin using fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated antisera to immunoglobulins A, G, and M, as well as fibrinogen and complement. Normal nonspecific stain-ing includes autofluorescence of dermal components such as elastic fibers, internal elastic laminae surrounding small-to medium-sized arteries and necrotic keratinocytes (colloid bodies). Basement membrane material can show weak auto-fluorescence that must be distinguished from true basement. "4 I" -, " the ducts are stained. membrane deposition. In addition, nonspecific staining can be seen in serum crust, spongiotic epidermis and linear zones surrounding blood vessels that have increased vascu-lar permeability. These nonspecific staining patterns tend to involve all FITC labeled immunoglobulins rather than spe-cific disease associated ones. Immunohistochemistry is the process of detecting cellular and fibrillar antigens in tissue section. The antigens may be cytoplasmic or nuclear and show cellu-lar events such as apoptosis or altered proliferation. Most commercially available antibodies can be used on formalin-fixed tissue. Positive or negative reactivity of the antibodies tested often depends on variables such as quality and dura-tion of fixation as well as the use of additional steps such as protease digestion and antigen retrieval. Additionally, rather than the usual "brown stain" DAB detection kit, we use a permanent "red" alkaline phosphatase detection kit, (Figure l.50) which is especially helpful in the diagnosis of pig-mented melanocytic lesions. Although a separate positive control slide is standard for each immunohistochemistry stain, this does not guarantee that the stain has worked properly for the patient's tissue. Interpretation of immunohistochemical studies relies on knowledge of normal skin components that can serve as internal positive controls. Immunohistochemistry is now widely used as an aid in the diagnosis of difficult cases where there is a defined differential. Examples include: Pigmented actinic keratosis and melanoma in situ, reactive and neo-plastic T-cell infiltrates, benign cutaneous lymphoid hyper-plasia and B-cell lymphoid neoplasms, atypical melanocytic proliferations and melanoma, basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, intraepider-mal pagetoid proliferations, poorly differentiated epithelioid and spindle cell tumors. Some commonly used panels in our laboratory are shown in Tables l.2, l.3. Epithelial Antibodies Cytokeratins AE1:AE3 348e12 CAM5.2 Cytokeratin 5/6 Cytokeratin 7 Cytokeratin 19 Cytokeratin 20 EMA 8erEp4 CEA Androgen receptorAppendage and epidermal keratinocytes Epidermal and follicular keratinocytes Apocrine, eccrine, and sebaceous glands Lining epithelium of skin and squamous mucosa Apocrine, eccrine, and sebaceous glands Apocrine and eccrine glands Normal epidermal basal layer Merkel cells Perineural cells, sometimes epidermis, sebocytes, luminal surfaces, and lateral borders of sweat glands Matrical and outer root sheath follicular keratinocytes and apocrine/eccrine glands Eccrine and apocrine gland luminal surfaces Sebaceous glands Melanocyte Antibodies S-100 Melan-A/MART-l HMB-45 Tyrosinase MITFNevo-melanocytes, nerves, adipose tissue, Langerhans cells, some dermal histiocytes/ dendrocytes, and myoepithelial cells Nevo-melanocytes Activated melanocytes and pigmented melanocytes Nevo-melanocytes Nevo-melanocytes, lymphocytes, smooth muscle cells, mast cells, fibroblasts, and Schwann cells Mesenchymal Antibodies Vascular endothelium CD31 CD34 FVIII FLI-l 02-40 SMA HHF-35 (muscle common actin) Desmin CD56 S-100Muscle NeuraVneuroendocrine FibroblastCytokeratin 20 Chromogranin Synaptophysin COlO CD34 FXllla CDl17Vascular endothelium Vascular endothelium Vascular endothelium and serum Vascular endothelium and small lymphocytes Lymphatic endothelium Myofibroblasts, smooth muscle Myofibroblasts, smooth muscle Smooth muscle Small dermal nerves Nevo-melanocytes, nerves, adipose tissue, Langerhans cells, some dermal histiocytes/ dendrocytes, and myoepithelial cells Merkel cells Merkel cells and nerves and some cells in eccrine/apocrine glands Merkel cells, nerves, and some cells in eccrine/apocrine glands Fibroblast proliferation and follicular center lymphocytes Mesenchymal and dendritic interstitial cells in dermis and around nerves, vascular endothelium, hematopoietic stem cells Dermal dendrocytes Mast cells, immature Langerhans cells, basal layer keratinocytes, and melanocytes EMA, epithelial membrane antigen; CEA, carcinoembryonic antigen; MITF, microphthalmia-associated transcription factor. There are numerous cytokeratins available ranging from cocktails of high- or low-molecular weight cytokeratins to individual cytokeratins. High-molecular weight cytokeratins 34Be12 and 5/6 are reactive with epidermal and follicular keratinocytes along with eccrine and apocrine sweat glands. As cytokeratin 5/6 is found primarily in mesothelium and other lining type epithelia such as epidermis and squamous mucosa, it is a particularly useful antibody in differentiating metastases from primary cutaneous tumors, either epidermalor adnexal. We have also found these cytokeratins to be helpful in the diagnosis/detection of poorly differentiated squamous cell and infiltrating/morpheaform basal cell carci-nomas in fibrotic and inflamed dermis. Cytokeratin 20 is a heavy weight cytokeratin which shows a specific perinuclear dot-like staining pattern in cutaneous neuroendo-crine carcinomas. Cytokeratin 7 shows simi-lar dot-like perinuclear reactivity with extracutaneous (met-astatic) neuroendocrine carcinomas. Low-molecular weight coloration is identical to that of the diaminobenzidine chromogen often used with immunohistochemistry, making distinction of a positive immunostain versus background melanin difficult. cytokeratins such as CAM5.2 and cytokeratin 7 are reac-tive with secretory glandular cells found in sebaceous apo-crine and eccrine glands and are valuable in the diagnosis of Paget's disease along with adnexal carcinomas. Other antibodies useful in the diagnosis of epithelial tumors include BerEp4 and p63. BerEp4 is an epithelial antibody used in differentiating basal cell from squamous cell carcinomas, as well as microcystic adnexal carcinoma from basal cell carcinomas. p63 is a proliferation antibody, which shows nuclear staining of many cutaneous infiltrative malignancies. It is particularly helpful in the diagnosis of spindle cell/sarcomatoid squamous cell carci-nomas. Melanocytic antibodies include the highly sensitive S-100 protein along with antibodies specific to melano-cytes such as Melan-NMART-l, HMB-45, and tyrosinase.34Be12 EMA BerEp4 Basal cell carcinoma + Squamous cell carcinoma + + + Melan-NMART-l and tyrosinase are antibodies associated with pre-melanosomes and are present in both benign and malignant neoplasms. However, HMB-45 reactivity is lim-ited to activated melanocytes and melanocytes with abun-dant melanin. This fact is utilized in differentiating atypical non-neoplastic dermal nevo-rnelanocytic proliferations from melanoma. Non-neoplastic nevo-rnelanocytic proliferations show a loss of HMB-45 reactivity upon progressive descent into the dermis, whereas most melanomas show no loss of HMB-45 reactivity. Another antibody useful in the diagno-sis of malignant melanocytic lesions is the nuclear prolif-eration antibody Ki-67. Similar to HMB-45, benign nevo-melanocytic lesions show a low to absent Ki-67 positiv-ity while many melanocytic malignancies show an increased Ki-67 staining pattern. However, not all melanomas show increased Ki-67 positivity and some may be negative. Melanocytic antibodies are helpful in the diagnosis of atypical dermal spindle cell malignancies and atypical epi-dermal proliferations. In desmoplastic/spindle cell melano-mas, there is variable reactivity with MART-l/Melan-A and HMB-45 is almost always negative. S-100 is often the only melanocytic antibody which is positive. MART-liMelan-A is useful in differentiating pigmented atypical keratinocytic epidermal proliferation from atypical junctional melanocytic proliferations (melanoma in situilentigo maligna). Antibodies which are reactive with varied normal mes-enchymal elements within the dermis and subcutis are use-ful when identifying their neoplastic counterparts. Vascular neoplasms, both benign and malignant, may be reactive MART-1 34Be12 CK7 p63 CAMS.2 Pagetoid Bowens + + disease Melanoma + +/-Paget's/ +/- + + extra mammary Paget's Sebaceous +/- + + + alkaline phosphate detection. with endothelial antibodies CD31, CD34, FVIII, FLI-l, and D2-40. Of these, CD31 is the most specific with FLI-l showing specificity for epithelioid angiosarcoma. FVIII often shows nonspecific staining of perivascular tissue, as it is associated with von Wille brand factor and is present not only in lining endothelial cells but in the surrounding extravascular plasma. CD34 is the least specific as it is also reactive with mesenchymal and dendritic interstitial cells in the dermis and around nerves. D2-40 is specifically reactive with lymphatic endothelium and can be used to confirm metastatic tumor within lymphatic vasculature. Although not reactive with any normal skin component, Herpes Virus Type 8 antibody is useful in the diagnosis of Kaposi's sarcoma. However, in some populations where this virus is endemic, it can be seen in non-Kaposi's sarcoma vascular and fibroblastic proliferations. Smooth muscle antibodies, alpha smooth muscle actin and HHF-35, are reactive with both vascular myoepithelium and arrector pili muscles with des-min limited to only smooth muscles. Fibrous tumors such as dermatofibroma and dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans may be differentiated with a combination of FXIIIa (derma-tofibromas) and CD34. CDI0 is a nonspecific antibody which in addition to reactivity with hematopoietic cells is also reactive with mesenchymal and dendritic interstitial cells in the dermis. Neural tumors show reactivity with S-100 along with NKI/ C 3. In addition, S-100 is positive with both cartilaginous and adipose tumors. Hematologic antibodies are used to define both the cell type in an inflammatory infiltrate as well as whether the infiltrate is reactive or malignant. Lymphoid markers include all available CD antibodies for the characterization of T-and B-cell reactive and neoplastic proliferations. Histio-cytic antibodies include CD68 and 163 for non-Langerhans cell histiocytes and CDla and S-100 for Langerhans cells and tumors. CD 117 is positive for mast cells as well as immature Langerhans cells, basal layer keratinocytes and melanocytes. Polymerase chain reaction molecu-lar biologic clonality studies in combination with immu-nohistochemical phenotyping have become useful in the differentiation of reactive and neoplastic T-cell and B-cell proliferations. Neuroendocrine cells are limited in normal skin to Merkel cells and eccrine sweat glands and can be dem-onstrated with chromogranin and synaptophysin. As men-tioned above, Merkel cells are positive with cytokeratin 20. An immunohistochemical panel for the diagnosis of neu-roendocrine tumors includes cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, TIF -1, synaptophysin, and chromogranin. Antibodies that demonstrate cell proliferation and apop-tosis such as Ki-67 and p53 are valuable in differentiating actively proliferating malignancies and dysplasias from the histologic atypical appearing benign counterparts. Ki-67 is useful in the diagnosis of melanomas and follicular cen-ter lymphomas from atypical nevi and pseudolymphomas, In situ hybridization with low-risk HPV 6 in a warty lesion. respectively. Ki-67 in combination with p53 is also helpful in the diagnosis of keratinocytes dysplasia in sun-damaged skin (actinic keratosis and in situ squamous cell carcinoma). Immunostains have become valuable in diagnosing or confirming infectious agents within the skin. There are antibodies specific for Herpes Simplex Virus, Vari-cella Zoster Virus, Herpes Virus Type 8, Cytomegalovirus, Spirochetes, and Mycobacterium. Further, in situ hybrid-ization is currently used for the diagnosis of high- and low-risk human papillomavirus condyloma accuminata lesions.