Familiarity with the normal structure of skeletal muscle provides a useful background for the pathologist in the evaluation of muscle biopsies. Other sources offering a more comprehensive discussion of the light microscopy, histochemistry, and electron microscopy of normal muscle than is possible here are found in the literature. The muscle fiber is a multinucleated, syncytial-like unit, shaped like a long, narrow cylinder. The normal adult myocyte is not perfectly round but is polygonal, producing a multifac-eted profile in cross section. The nuclei are usually located subsarcolemmally, numbering four to six per cell when sectioned transversely. For each millimeter of fiber length, there are approximately 30 nuclei. In routine sections the sarcolemmal nuclei are slender and flat, with an orientation that is parallel to the long axis of the fiber. These nuclei the sarcolemmal nuclei are peripheral in location. measure 5 to 12 urnin length and 1 to 3 urnin width. Their chromatin is fine and dustlike. The nucleoli are small and not visible in many fibers. In paraffin sections stained with H&E, the sarcoplasm is light pink and textured in cross sections. In frozen sections that are often rou-tine in biopsies submitted for diagnosis, muscle tissue is stained with Gomori's rapid trichrome. Here the fibers and connective tissue stain green whereas nuclei are blue-black. In some cases, the mitochondria can be identi-fied, especially in type 1 fibers, as tiny red granules within the sarcoplasm. The cross-striations must be viewed in longitudinal sections and are difficult to see in any detail without special stains. They are best demon-strated in periodic acid-Schiff and PTAH stains or in resin-embedded material where alternating dark and light bands are evident. The diameter of fibers is determined by several factors (see the Gender, Training, and Aging section).Proximal muscles, where power rather than finely coor-dinated movement is required, have a fiber population with a larger mean diameter, whereas those of smaller, distal, and ocular muscles are composed of thinner fibers. Fiber size in males exceeds that in females, probably in part because of androgenic hormonal influences and more strenuous physical demands. In both genders, exer-cise promotes fiber hypertrophy. Muscle fibers are smaller in children and in the elderly than in young active adults, although comprehensive normative data at these ages are not easy to find. Red muscle, having a larger mitochondrial and lipid content and higher capillary density, depends on aerobic respiration and is designed for postural function or sus-tained activity. The color of red muscles is actually due to relatively greater myoglobin content than white muscles, which contain fewer mitochondria but abundant glycogen, rendering it better suited to anaerobic respiration and to the subsarcolemmal regions of the fiber. B.Normal muscle. In the standard ATPase reaction, type 1 fibers are light and type 2 fibers are dark. C.Normal muscle. In oxidative enzyme reactions, type 1fibers are very dark, and type 2 fibers are intermediate or light in staining intensity. D.With PAS stain, variable staining of fibers reflects glycogen content and crudely approximates fiber type distribution. section. sudden and intermittent contraction. In vertebrates, partic-ularly in birds, red can easily be distinguished from white muscles upon external inspec-tion, since an entire muscle in such species may be com-posed of either red or white fibers. Human muscles, on the contrary, contain both fiber types, which typically assume a mixed mosaic arrangement reminiscent of checkerboard. Depending on anatomic location and function, the propor-tion of type 1 and type 2 fibers varies, but a typical muscle contains approximately twice as many type 2 fibers (60 to 65%) as type 1 fibers. The demonstration of the histochemical properties of the muscle fibers comprising a biopsy, which is known as fiber typing, is accomplished by applying histochemical techniques. Fiber typing is not possible in rou-tine H&E-stained slides and is only appreciated in using histoenzymatic reactions performed on frozen sections. In our laboratory, two complementary histochemical proce-dures are employed for the detection of fiber types. The most reliable method for this purpose is the myofibrillar ATPase reaction. By changing the pH during the procedure, a spectrum of staining reactions can be produced. In the standard or alkaline ATPase reaction, which is conducted at a pH of 9.4, two fiber types are seen. Type 2 fibers are dark in staining intensity, whereas type 1 fibers are pale Stain/Reaction Type 1 Fibers Type 2 Fibers ATPase, pH 9.4 Light Dark NADH-TR Dark Light PAS/phosphorylase Light Dark Oil reda Dark Light. Fibers of intermediate staining intensity are not observed in the alkaline incubation. Ifthe pH of the incubating solution is brought into the acidic range in what is sometimes known as the reverse ATPase reaction, two populations of type 2 fibers emerge. Type 2A fibers are virtually unstained and type 2B fibers are intermediately stained, whereas type 1 fibers are extremely dark. All the oxidative enzyme reactions, such as the NADH-TR used in our laboratory, merely reflect the mitochondrial content of the muscle fibers. Intensely stained fibers are designated as oxidative and lighter fibers as type 2. Most oxidative enzyme reac-tions further subdivide type 2 fibers into two categories. Type 2B fibers are poorly stained in contrast to type 2A fibers, which exhibit a staining intensity that is intermedi-ate between type 1 and 2B. Although all muscle fibers con-tain glycogen and the companion enzyme phosphorylase, they are more abundant in type 2 fibers. The PAS stain, a crude method of detecting glycogen, and the histochemical reaction for phosphorylase can be used as a means of fiber typing. However, staining with these techniques is not totally reliable for fiber typing. We use only the phosphorylase reaction to investigate possible cases of enzyme deficiency. Type 1 fibers are rich in lipid, which can be visualized in fat stains such as the oil red 0; but, like the PAS stain, fat stains are not as reliable for fiber typing as are enzyme reactions. Striated muscles are partitioned into fascicles, each of which is invested by a connective tissue sheath known as the perimysium. Within this sheath, the intramuscular nerves, primary arteries, secondary and terminal arterioles, and veins travel throughout the muscle. At the innervation zone in the belly of the muscle, intramuscular nerve bun-dles or twigs are especially numerous. Up to 10 myelinated nerve fibers may be present in an individual twig, which is surrounded by a thin mantle of perineurial connective tissue. The myelinated nerve fibers are perhaps best demonstrated in trichrome-stained sections, preferably Oxidative fibers have a more dense lipid concentration. rounded by red-staining myelin sheaths. the RTC, in which the bright red-colored myelin sheaths resemble doughnuts surrounding the unstained axons. Tan-gential sections of twigs may be mistaken for areas of focal fibrosis or abnormal vascular structures. The perimysium is a framework that lends stability to the fascicles, in part by its attachment to the epimysium. The epimysium forms septa that sequester groups of fascicles, as well as the fascia that encircles the entire muscle and merges with the dense collagenous connective tissue of the tendons. Within each fascicle, the perimysium gives way to a normally unobtrusive network, the endomysium. Each muscle fiber may appear to be partly or completely invested by endomysium, a mesenchymal matrix composed of col-lagen, elastic, and reticulin fibers that support the preter-minal arterioles and capillary blood supply to the fascicles. Where the muscle-tendon junction has interdigitations of the cell membrane, the interface is enlarged, transferring tension into shear stress. Two transmembrane proteins, the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex and a7~1 integrin, are especially abundant at the myotendinous junction. It is believed that the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex main-tains the integrity of the sarcolemma whereas a7~1 integ-rin, a receptor for laminin-2, plays a role in the organization of the basement membrane at the myotendinous junction. At the interface between muscle and either fascia or ten-don, the muscle fibers become variable, often small in size, and internal nuclei are more abundant. As they attach to the tendon or fascia, the fibers are separated by dense collag-enous trabeculae. Since the normal histology of these regions may easily be misinterpreted as evidence of pathologic change, the muscle biopsy should be obtained from the belly of the muscle, avoiding the tendinous inser-tions. A deep rather than a superficial biopsy is preferred to avoid the fascia. Several specialized structures are found within the con-nective tissue supporting framework. Muscle spindles, first described in the nineteenth century, were once considered Tendinous insertion. At the interface, the muscle fibers normally vary in size and are partly surrounded by connective tissue. to be a pathologic finding. Spindles are now known to be mechanoreceptors that sense the length and tension of skel-etal muscle, governing integrated muscle activity. Although they are encountered in virtually all muscles, they are more frequently detected in smaller muscles devoted to finely coordinated activities, such as those of the hand. They are more numerous in distal than in girdle muscles. Quantita-tive studies have shown that 70 to 100 muscle spindles may be located in an individual muscle. Muscle spindles tend to lie in the deeper portions of the muscle, particularly in the muscle belly. They are often found where type 1 fibers are more plentiful. As the name implies, muscle spindles are fusiform in shape with a swollen center and tapering ends. They mea-sure 3 to 4 mm in length and 200 urnin diameter. A thin fibrous capsule represents the outer boundaries of the mus-cle spindle. The capsule is an extension of the perimysium, where spindles are usually located. In certain muscles, such as those of the eye, face, and mouth, the capsule merges with the perimysium and is somewhat indistinct. The cap-sule is composed of 10 to 15 layers of flattened pavement cells that are specialized fibroblasts. The pavement cells are tightly adherent and separated only by thin layers of delicate collagen fibrils. The pavement cells are epithelial-like in that each is surrounded by a basement membrane. As one proceeds from the equatorial region of the spindle toward the poles, the number of layers of pavement cells progressively diminishes. Within the capsule are 3 to 15 intrafusal fibers in the typi-cal muscle spindle. Generally the number of intrafusal fibers is less in small muscles than in larger axial muscles. Two distinct populations of intrafusal fibers are found, both of which are smaller in diameter than the extra-fusal fibers. The larger bag fibers, usually one to three per spindle, measure about 20 urnin diameter. The chain fibers number two to seven per spindle, with a diameter of 10 urnor less. The bag fibers are longer, sometimes extending beyond and several intrafusal fibers, which are normally smaller than the extra-fusal fibers. the polar ends of the capsule. They measure 4 to 8 mm in length. The chain fibers are shorter, measuring 2to4mm. The bag fibers are recognized in the equatorial region of the spindle by the presence of large aggregations of nuclei. Away from the equatorial region, the nuclei remain internal or cen-tral in the bag fibers but are far less numerous. The smaller chain fibers are distinguished by a row of central nuclei, which extends along the length of the fiber. In histochemical stains, there are two types of bag fibers. Bag 1fibers reveal considerable oxidative enzyme activity and are pale in ATPase reactions. On the contrary, bag 2 fibers, which also have high oxidative enzyme activity, reveal intermediate staining in ATPase reactions. Chain fibers, although they possess high oxidative enzyme activity, stain darkly in ATPase reactions and are considered by many to be type 2 fibers. The innervation of muscle spindles, which is both motor and sensory, is complex and will only be summarized here. The intrafusal efferent fibers are derived from branches of ~- and {-efferent axons. The ~-axons appear to terminate primarily on nuclear bag fibers. The "{-fibers supply both nuclear bag and chain intrafusal fibers. It is not uncom-mon for intrafusal fibers to have polyneural innervation. Two types of sensory innervation are seen in the muscle spindle. The larger diameter group Ia afferent fibers ema-nate from the equator. They originate as the annulospiral endings, a series of neural coils and spirals that attach to the nuclear bag and chain fibers. Smaller diameter group II afferent fibers come from the paraequatorial regions of the spindle and are associated mainly with the so-called flower spray endings of Ruffini. The majority of these endings proj-ect from the nuclear chain fibers. The secondary, or flower spray, endings consist of a branching network that enwraps the intrafusal fiber between its polar and equatorial regions. The Golgi tendon organ is an encapsulated sensory nerve terminal that is located at the junction of muscle with tendon or aponeurosis. The location of these structures allows themFIGURE B.ll Golgi tendon organ. Fascicles of collagen surrounded by several nerve bundles. to sense changes in muscle tension. They have an inhibitory function in the event of strong muscle contraction. These fusiform structures measure about 1.5 mm in length and 120urnin diameter. They consist of one or more fascicles of collagen fibrils that are attached to tendon or aponeuro-sis and enveloped by a multilamellar capsule. Each structure is connected to 20 to 30 muscle fibers. The Golgi tendon organ is innervated by a myelinated Ib afferent axon, measuring 7 to 15 urnin diameter. The afferent nerve typically divides and arborizes around the individual collagen bundles. Pacinian corpuscles are distributed widely in the sub-cutaneous tissues of the body, although they may also be encountered within the muscular fascial planes and adja-cent to tendons or aponeuroses. They are seldom seen within muscle tissue itself. In the center of the Pacinian corpuscle is a central rodlike nerve terminal innervated by fast-conducting group I or II afferent axons. The central axon is surrounded by a capsule composed of concentric layers of cells. The elongated cells forming the capsule are surrounded by basal lamina and separated by fine collagen fibrils. Pacinian corpuscles are receptor organs that are sensitive to vibration.