Currently, there is no commercially available specific immunohistochemical marker for adipose tissue. However, an adipocyte lipid-binding protein, p422 or aP2, is a protein expressed exclusively in preadipocytes late in adipogenesis. Preliminary studies with an antibody to aP2 demonstrate that it stains only lipoblasts and brown fat cells and is capa-ble of identifying liposarcomas selectively. This may be quite useful diagnostically in the future. Adipocytes and tumors thereof stain positively for vimentin; and, in our experience, adipocytic tumors have been negative for cytokeratin, desmin, and muscle-specific actin. In 1983, Michetti et al. were the first to describe S-100 immunoreactivity in adipocytes, specifically of rat ori-gin. The S-l 00 protein was extracted and shown to be iden-tical to that found in the rat brain. Ultrastructurally, S-100 reactivity was widely dispersed within adipocyte cytoplasm but was not found within mitochondria, lipid droplets, or most of the ER. In a similar ultrastructural study, Haimoto et al. identified S-100 protein in the plasma mem-branes, in membranes of microvesicles, and within poly-somes. The Golgi apparatus was negative for this marker, although some reactivity was found within the rough ER. During the process of lipolysis in fat cells, Haimoto et al. noted a change in the distribution of S-l 00 antigen and suggested that S-100 protein molecules interact with free fatty acids, indicating that this protein may act as a carrier protein for free fatty acids. The S-100 protein is a highly acidic calcium-binding protein of molecular weight 21,000. It consists of two poly-peptide chains and may occur as dimers in three ways: S-100a, S-100b, or S-100ao. the nuclei and in the cytoplasm surrounding the lipid droplets. Such S-100-positive results appear to vary considerably from case to case, probably reflecting fixation differences. When fat cells have been analyzed, they have been shown to contain only S-100b, like Schwann cells. In the routine practice of immunohistochemistry, adipose tissue reacts in a variable fashion, accounting for some negative reactions observed by Kahn et al Although lipomas and liposarcomas are reported to be fre-quently positive with S-100, in our experience, this has not been true. Regardless of fixation with formalin or Bouin's solution, very few liposarcomas have exhibited S-100 immunoreactivity. Adipocytic lesions do not stain with antibodies to neuron-specific enolase. Brown fat also exhibits S-100 protein reactivity but curiously may also express the endothelial marker CD31, a potential pitfall. Obesity Human obesity is thought to be approximately 60% genetic in origin, with multiple genetic and environmental factors involved. The role of BAT was briefly alluded to ear-lier, and new research continues to underscore its impor-tance. For example, in transgenic mice engineered to lack BAT, obesity develops routinely. In mice, the genetics of obesity are more clear than in humans. A team at the Rockefeller University led by Dr. Friedman first reported the identification of the obmouse gene and showed that mutations of it are associated with the development of obe-sity. These same researchers have located the human counterpart and mapped its location to chro-mosome 7. The human protein produced by this gene has 84% homology with the mouse protein, appears to be a hormone secreted by adipose tissue, and likely functions as part of a pathway to regulate body fat. If, indeed, a defective hormone is responsible for some forms of obesity, then there is an immediate therapy available in the form of fully intact native hormone. In 1995, several research groupshave shown that injection of the ob protein into mice causes the animals to lose weight and maintain their weight loss. Even obesity due to a nongenetic defect like excess diet fat is corrected by the ob protein, now called "leptin." Finally, the receptor for this protein has been identified recently and shown to be nonfunctional in obese animals. Clearly, there have been major advances constituting a breakthrough in obesity research, and the fruits of this research should affect human therapy soon. ADiPOCYTE LESIONS Terminology In contrast to other human tissue cell types, the terms hyper-trophy and hyperplasia are not usually applied to the adipo-cyte. It is stressed here, however, that adipocyte hypertrophy is a recognized phenomenon and is found, for example, in obesity. Enlarged, or hypertrophic, fat cells can also be identified in neoplasia where cells appear to have three or four times the normal diameter. Hyper-plasia, in contrast to widespread belief, is a definite occurrence. Again, it is common in obese patients, but it may also be seen in organ-based infiltrations; these are a type of site-specific adipocyte hyperplastic processes. Mature adipocytes are incapable of regeneration, and new fat cells are added through in situ mesenchymal cell differentiation recruited from primitive perivascular cells. No disease or change involving adipo-cytes can appropriately be termed a "degeneration (as men-tioned earlier)," other than liquefaction with necrosis. Atro-phy of adipocytes may be seen in malnutrition, starvation, or as the effect of chemotherapy (see the section entitled Atrophy). The appearance of mature fat cells as small foci in unusual places is termed metaplasia and is discussed in a later section. Localized new growths of either pure adi-pocytes or mixtures of adipocytes in other tissue constitute neoplasia and are presumably clonal entities. Degeneration In the condition sclerema adiposum neonatorum, the sub-cutaneous fat is grossly and microscopically abnormal. Rubbery plaques are due to fat necrosis and degenerative individual fat cells with intracellular needle-shaped crystals. This fat crystallization is brown and can be high-lighted by polarization. Such crystals apparently may also be identified in up to 30% of stillbirths as a general degenera-tion following intrauterine demise. In another disease, Neu Laxova syndrome, a defect in lipid metabolism, causes a lardlike appearance to the adipose tissue and is lethal. Atrophy The changes in fat lobules during starvation or malnutrition are particularly noticeable in the subcutaneous region or the omentum. Individual fat cells are reduced in size and fat content, and those without much lipid take on a rounded or epithelioid appearance. In the extreme, lobules of these epithelioid cells can simulate tumor nodules histo-logically. The cytoplasm is variable in amount and is eosinophilic or granular with or without small lipid vacuoles of differing size, depending on the severity of the malnutrition. Some cells have a multivacuolated appear-ance. The intervening region between cells is constituted by homogeneous eosinophilic or amphophilic myxoid groundsubstance that is probably an extract of serum, although stimulation of proteoglycan matrix by the process of starvation is possible. As part of this involution process, lipofuscin is deposited within the shrinking cells. Importantly, each lobule retains its overall oval shape, although markedly reduced in size and consider-ably separated from other lobules. In extreme cachexia, only streaks of tissue remain. Nearly identical changes can also be seen in the white adipose tissue of fasted animals. As the cells gradually lose tumor deposits. B.At high power, shrunken eosinophilic cells are seen with occasional vacuoles and lipofuscin pigment. C.In less severe starvation, these omental adipocytes are well-recognized, although much smaller than normal size; again, note the presence of pigment. D.In the skin, severe cachexia secondary to a cancer resulted in marked involution ofthe cutaneous fat lobules, which appear only as elongated streaks. their lipid, the single lipid droplet breaks up into mul-tiple vacuoles. Gradually, all lipid disappears. These cells become small and ovoid in shape, sometimes measuring only 15 11min diameter. There is an apparent expan-sion of pericellular collagen in such a way that these cells appear as clusters of mesenchymal cells in fibrous stroma. Similarly, in cachexia, the fat cells are reduced in volume but not in number. Ultrastructurally, multiple pinocy-totic vesicles are seen clustered along the entire cell mem-brane. Lipid is not seen within these vesicles, and their significance is unknown. In the bone marrow, chemotherapy causes changes referred to as serous atrophy or gelatinous transformation. The majority of the fat cells have been destroyed, leaving scattered adipocytes of varying size remaining. No lobular appearance is present in the marrow, but the inter-stitial compartment is composed of the same eosinophilic myxoid substance described previously, again probably con-sisting of serum fluid and proteins. Droplets of lipid scat-tered about are also found and, upon regeneration, may appear as foci of lipogranulomas. Although the microscopic features of the starvation effect on human brown fat have not been described, ani-mals maintained on a dextrose-thiamine diet are known to show distinct morphologic changes in brown fat. The mitochondria are disrupted and large, irregular electron-dense inclusions are seen within the mitochondrial matrix. The cristae may assume a mosaic pattern with compart-mentalization of the material. These cells revert to normal after 24 hours of a normal diet. Similar changes in white fat mitochondria have not been seen with starvation, suggest-ing that the active mitochondria of brown fat are particu-larly labile and sensitive to dietary changes. Cellulite The term "cellulite" is applied to the external skin when it exhibits linear depressed streaks or frank dimpling. Cellulite is typically found on the thigh and buttocks and is more common in females; it can be divided into incipient cellulite and full-blown cellulite. The former results from an uneven undersurface of the dermal-hypodermal interface, with fibrous tissue surrounding the protruding papillae adiposa; vertical fibrous strands of uneven thickness divide the hypodermal fat. In con-trast, full-blown cellulite consists of a delicate meshwork of collagen fibers produced by increased hypodermal pres-sure of fat accumulation and increasing fat volume. Scat-tered CD34+ fibroblasts are seen in both forms of cellulite. Unlike women, men have a more smooth, strand-free der-mal interface in the thigh and buttock areas. Ischemia Little is written about the effect of ischemia on the adipo-cyte. We have observed changes in the subcutaneous fat of legs removed for atherosclerotic vascular disease. They con-sist of accentuation of the lobular architecture by thicken- Accentuated fat lobules in ischemia of the lower extremity. Loose myxoid connective tissue widens the septa between lobules; edema and a mild inflammatory infiltrate are present. ing of the fibrous septa; wider and more myxoid in quality, the septa are edematous and also contain scattered inflam-matory cells. Actual necrosis was not observed. Metaplasia As surgical pathologists, we most frequently encounter adipocytic metaplasia, usually calcified, in cardiac valves. There is little in the literature or textbooks are found in a myxoid background but are more commonly seen in association with calcification or ossification. on this phenomenon. The emergence of mature adipose tis-sue seems to parallel the appearance of osteoblasts form-ing bone within the calcific deposits. Once adipose tissue is present, bone marrow precursors may become resident, presumably from circulating cells, and cause hemato-poiesis. Metaplasia is not limited to this site and may be encountered in calcified large vessels or elsewhere, such as in laryngeal cartilage undergoing ossification. We have even seen it in small ossified bronchioles. A similar phenomenon of hematopoiesis without adipose tissue and bone has been reported within acoustic neuromas.