The nail apparatus is constantly exposed to environmental damage. It requires effective immune responses to combat infection, while avoiding the loss of nail production and regeneration by autoaggressive immunity. Ito et al. have well described the immunology of the human nail apparatus. Compared with other regions of nail epithelium, human leukocyte antigen-NB/C expression is prominently Alpha-1 Alpha-2 Alpha-3 Alpha-4 Alpha-5 Alpha-6 Alpha-v Beta-1 Beta-4 ICAM-1 Basal membrane zone +++ +++ Basal layer ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++ Supra basal layer ++ ++ + ++ Supra basal layers + + + + Keratogenous zone "Camef N, Picardo M, Tosti A, Perrin C, Pisani A, Ortonne JP. Expression of integrins in human nail matrix. BrJDermatoI1994;130:5B3-5BB. downregulated on both keratinocytes and melanocytes of the proximal nail matrix, whereas HLA-G is upregulated here. Together with the expression of macrophage migration inhibitory factor in proximal nail matrix, this may serve to inhibit a natural killer cell attack on major histocom-patibility complex class la-negative proximal nail matrix, and also displays strong immunoreactivity for potent, locally generated immunosuppressants such as transform-ing growth factor-beta 1, alpha-melanocyte stimulating hor-mone, insulin-like growth factor-I, and adrenocorticotropic hormone, exhibits unusually few CDla, CD4, or CD8, NK, and mast cells. In the same way, Ito et al. found important immunologic differences between the nail apparatus and the pilosebaceous unit in man: ~2 microglobulin is not detected in the proximal epi-thelium of human hair follicle, but was positive in the proximal nail fold. In contrast to the strongly MHC class 1+and ~2 microglobulin + mesenchyme of the human hair fol-licle, the nail immune privilege appears to extend to the periungual mesenchyme, especially around the proximal nail fold, as the latter is also MHC class I-negative and shows a greatly reduced number of T, Langerhans, and NK cells. HLA-G is strongly expressed in the nail matrix, but has not been reported in human hair matrix and was also not found by us in sections of normal human scalp skin. MHC class II and CD 209 expression on CDla cells in and around the proximal matrix is reduced, indicat-ing diminished antigen-presenting capacity. Thus, the nail immune system strikingly differs from the skin immune system, but shows intriguing similarities to the hair follicle immune system, including the establishment of an area of relative immune privilege in the proximal nail fold. This nail immune privilege may offer a relative safeguard against autoimmunity. But, the localized intraepithelial defect of innate and adaptive immunity in the proximal nail matrixrevealed here also may impede effective anti-infection defense. Bcl-2 immunostain is very positive in the ventral nail matrix epithelium; however, p53 and Ki-67 stains was poorly expressed in this area. On the other hand, chronic and acute inflammatory nail disorders because of infection or irritation (maceration, chemical damage) affect primarily the PNF not the PNM. Therefore, it is conceivable that the relative immune privi-lege of the PNM may serve to suppress inflammatory/auto-immune damage to the most critical component of the actual "nail factory" to promote the survival chances of a species by protecting it from a loss of claws, hooves, or nails because of pro-inflammatory environmental insults (maceration, trauma, chemical irritation, bacterial and fungal infection), and to quickly restore the vital use of these skin appendages by limiting swelling and pain after nail trauma or infection.