The normal structure of vessels, particularly the aorta, elastic and muscular arteries, and the larger veins, change progressively throughout life. These aging changes lead to increased arterial stiffness, detected clini-cally by alterations in pulse wave velocity. It is now clear that aging arteries are especially affected by common disorders such as atherosclerosis, hypertension, and diabe-tes. Surgical pathologists must be fully aware not only of the nature and extent of these alterations, but also of their variation from site to site. Aorta The length and the breadth of the aorta increase progres-sively throughout life. Although there are some variations in the rate of these changes, both between men and women and from decade to decade, the process continues well into a person's seventies and eighties. This enlargement pro-duces the characteristic unfolding of the aorta so often seen in chest radiographs; and, if the aortic valve annulus is also involved, aortic incompetence can result. Some atherosclero-sis is almost inevitable in the abdominal aorta in the middle-aged and elderly, but aging changes are independent of this.Media 251 Adventitia and Supporting Cells 251 Lymphatics and Veins 251 ANTIGEN EXPRESSION OF NORMAL AND NEOPLASTIC VASCULAR TISSUE 251 Endothelium 251 Smooth Muscle 253 Other Useful Antibodies for Diagnostic Vascular Pathology 256 REFERENCES 256 The principal components of all arteries are elas-tic and collagen fibers, smooth muscle cells, and a mucopolysaccharide-rich ground substance. In the media of the aorta and the carotid, the innominate and proximal axillary arteries elastic fibers predominate. Paral-lel lamellar units of elastin enclose smooth muscle cells, ground substance, and collagen. There are about 40 lamellar units at birth and at least 50 in adult life, each measuring about 11 urn in thickness. Interconnect-ing bands of collagen and elastin fibers provide strength, whereas the lamellar arrangement distributes stress evenly across the wall, smoothing the cyclical pressure waves of cardiac contraction. The changes associated with vas-cular aging include progressive thickening of the aortic wall due to accumulation of smooth muscle cells and ground substance and thinning and fragmentation of elastic fibers with associated foci of fibrous tissue and proteo-glycan deposition. These changes in the structure of the extracellular matrix are thought to be the result of upreg-ulation of genes in SMC that mediate matrix metallopro-teinase production. Apoptosis can be demonstrated in a number of cell types within atheromatous plaques. While it is unlikely to be a key factor in the aging of the arterial wall there is experimental evidence that chronic apoptosis of vascular smooth muscle cells accelerates Major Macroscopic and Histologic Features Aorta Progressive and linear increase in diameter with age. Eccentric or diffuse fibrous intimal thickening. Fragmentation of elastic lamellae with widening of interlamellar spaces. Focal amyloid deposits. Thickening of walls of vasa vasorum. Muscular arteries Progressive dilatation and tortuosity. Caliber of vessels usually less in females, especially coronary arteries. Intimal fibrosis, sometimes suggesting reduplication ofthe internal elastic lamella. Focal fragmentation and calcification of internal elastic lamella. Increased fibrosis and hyalinization of media. No significant inflammation in atheroma-free segments. Arterioles Intimal thickening, usually as concentric layers of fibroelastic tissue. Hyalinization of media. Capillaries Basement membrane thickening, approximately twofold increase in thickness from puberty to old age. Venules and veins Few detailed studies of small veins. Larger veins show intimal fibrosis and hypertrophy of both circular and longitudinal bundles. atherosclerosis and promotes calcification and medial degeneration. Aging changes are the result of decades of 'wear and tear'. In the longterm they account for the weak-ening that leads to aortic dilatation, especially in patients with systemic hypertension. In this respect, the effects of hypertension on the wall of arteries can be seen as acceler-ated aging. Vascular calcification is a common complication and, although it is most frequent in atheromatous segments, it may occur in areas where the intima is virtually devoid of plaques. Aortic and coronary arterial calcifications are especially common in chronic kidney disease and may, in part, be related to hyperphosphatemia. In its most pronounced form layers of calcifications replace large parts of the media of arteries, a condition termed Monckeberg's sclerosis. Small amounts of amyloid can be detected in aortic atheromatous lesions of middle-aged and elderly subjects and may be derived from serum amyloid A or other apolipoproteins. Cystic medial degeneration, originally called medionecrosis aortae by Erdheim, is a difficult concept, and many pathologists are unsure about the exact meaning of the term. Histologically, the condition is characterized by degeneration and fragmentation of the elastic layers of the media and formation of mucoid pools. However, it is important for surgical pathologists to recognize that there is wide variation in the extent of degeneration in biopsies of the ascending aorta throughout the aorta. Multiple blocks should therefore be examined. Some areas have few, if any, stainable nuclei, and this is the result ofCondition Major Histologic Features Normal adults Minimal intimal thickening may be eccentric or diffuse. Intact internal elastic lamella, occasional small breaks only. No significant inflammation. Atherosclerosis Eccentric fibrous intimal thickening, intimal and medial foam cell and lipid deposition. Neovascularization with intimal and medial hemorrhage. Dystrophic calcification. Adventitial aggregates of plasma cells, lymphocytes, and histiocytes. Intimal and medial aggregates of T lymphocytes, especially at shoulders of lesion. The most important complication is rupture or erosion of fibrous cap of the lesion with associated thrombus formation. Systematic hypertension Concentric fibrous intimal thickening and medial hypertrophy, especially in arterioles. Changes pronounced in accelerated or malignant phase, with fibrinoid necrosis. Aneurysmal dilatation of intracerebral arterioles and capillaries. Increased atherosclerosis. Diabetes mellitus Hyalin change in arterioles. Capillary microaneurysms with basement membrane thickening. Loss of pericytes; retinal neovascularization. Increased atherosclerosis in arteries. Active arteritis Acute or chronic inflammatory cell inflammation of adventitia and media. Mural edema, reactive intimal thickening, and endothelial necrosis. Fibrinoid necrosis of wall, occasionally aneurysmal dilatation. Healed arteritis Bizarre patterns of disordered fibrous intimal thickening. Medial scarring with patchy aggregates of chronic inflammatory cells. Abnormally prominent medial blood vessels. smooth muscle cell death. More recently, areas of smooth muscle cell apoptosis and disorganized proliferation, fibro-sis, and angiogenesis have been described, suggesting that CMD is a process of degenerative injury and repair. In 1977, Schlatmann and Becker showed that the histo-logic alterations of CMD showed a striking correlation with age and may therefore represent the normal aging process of elastic arteries. The same features are seen in hyperten-sive patients, who have an altered hemodynamic profile, and in genetic disorders of connective tissue, such as Mar-fan's or some types of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. They have also been reported in patients with a history of cocaine abuse. In connective tissue disorders, CMD is more pronounced and leads to complications such as intramural hematoma formation or aortic dissection at an earlier age. cB thickening, which has no immediate clinical relevance but may predispose to atherosclerosis. There was only slight fragmentation of the elastic lamellae; the overall appearance is well within normal limits for a patient of this age. B.Overview of three full thickness cross sections through the dilated thoracic aorta of a 74-year-old man. There is marked variation in the degree of degenerative change of the media. The boxed area in the central section has an almost normal appearance. In contrast the boxed area on the right shows marked elastic degeneration. E.The typical appear-ance of cystic medial degeneration in an H&E-stained section. Note the prominent pool of mucoid material. F.This shows a corresponding section to E but is stained for elastic tissue. There is extensive loss of the normal elastic framework. from a lower limb amputation specimen from a patient with diabetes. Note the prominent shell-like calcification of the media. This is termed Monckeberg's sclerosis. Although the exact cause of CMD is unknown, it appears to be related to an imbalance between the mechan-ical forces imposed on the aortic wall during systole and the capacity of the aortic wall to resist these forces. The resulting shear forces may cause alterations in the secretion pattern of smooth muscle cells or their death by apopto-sis. p53 accumulation, baxupregulation, and both vascular smooth muscle cell apoptosis and regeneration have been demonstrated in areas of cystic medial necrosis. In Marfan's syndrome, the histologic changes suggest exagger-ated aging, but there are no features that allow a specific diagnosis to be made. The underlying genetic abnormality involves a glycoprotein, fibrillin , that is closely associated with elastin fibers. The exact functions of fibril-lin and other associated glycoproteins are uncertain, but they may act as a "scaffold" on which elastin fibers are laid down. There is also growing evidence for abnormal TGF~ signaling in Marfan's disease and other inherited aortopa-thies. There is a wide spectrum of clinical abnor-malities in Marfan's syndrome, and certain clinical features, such as arachnodactyly or aortic dissection, are especially common in some families. Elastic fragmentation and associated medial necrosis are the most common histologic findings in both ascend-ing and thoracic aortic aneurysms. At least 17 predomi-nantly genetic disorders have been associated with these aneurysms in younger patients. Traditionally, abdomi-nal aortic aneurysms have been considered atheromatous in origin, but this is an oversimplification. Genetic studies have provided compelling evidence for an inherited basis of this disease. Although susceptibility genes have been described, causative gene mutations have not. Inheri-tance is usually autosomal dominant but about 25% of lamellae of elastic tissue. There is no significant intimal thickening. B. The aortic wall of a 31-year-old man with Marten's syndrome. The medial elastic tissue is extensively fragmented, and there is fibrosis and loose mucopoly-saccharide-rich areas. Such extensive changes would be unusual even in an elderly patient IElastic van Gieson). cases are recessive. Both males and females are affected. Whether the atherosclerosis is the primary cause or a secondary complication, the inflammation and medial scar-ring that accompany all but the earliest stages of atheroma further damage a wall already weakened by normal aging or by specific genetically determined alterations in the matrix of the aortic wall. Patchy chronic inflammatory aggregates, including lymphocytes and plasma cells, are often present in the adventitia of atheromatous segments of the aorta and coronary arteries. In biopsies of the ascend-ing aorta during repair of dissecting aneurysms or aortic reconstructions for root dilatation, these chronic adventi-tial infiltrates must not be mistaken as evidence of aortitis. Small collections of lymphocytes, macrophages, and giant cells are occasionally seen in the media of these biopsies. This is now termed isolated idiopathic aortitis. There are case reports of aortic dissection in this condition. Accordingly we always suggest that giant cell aortitis shouldbe excluded clinically in these patients. In some abdomi-nal aneurysms, the inflammatory infiltrates are especially dense, and surgical repair may be difficult. There is growing evidence that aortitis, periaortitis, and retroperitoneal fibro-sis may be part of an IgG4-related systemic disease at least in some cases. Cardiac surgeons have several techniques for repair-ing aortic coarctations and may submit samples of aorta, the narrowed aortic segment, the subclavian artery, or the ductus arteriosus for histologic identifica-tion. The aorta around the coarctation may show reactive intimal thickening, even in neonates, but the underlying elastic structure is usually well preserved. The coarctation itself can have a variety of appearances. In long-standing cases, there may be dense intimal and medial fibrosis. In neonates, the intima may have a distinctly irregular pattern of fibroelastic intimal thickening, resembling some forms of arterial dysplasia. The structure of the arterial aortitis. There is marked thickening ofthe aortic wall and multifocal presence of inflammatory infiltrates in the media of the artery. Also note the nodular lymphocytic infiltrates in the periadventitial tissues. They are not unique for chronic aortitis, but can also be seen in severely atherosclerotic arteries. B.Detail of inflammatory infiltrate showing presence of multiple giant cells. C and D.Adventitial chronic inflamma-tory infiltrates in the wall of an atheromatous coronary artery. A few inflammatory cells have infiltrated into the media. The magnified view on the right confirms that most ofthe inflammatory cells are lymphocytes or plasma cells. is slight intimal edema only. B.The coarctation itself; note the irregular arrangement of the intimal fibroelastic tissue. duct changes progressively during intrauterine growth and in the postnatal period and can be influenced by pros-taglandin treatment. Unlike the aorta and the proximal subclavian artery, which are elastic vessels, the arterial duct has a muscular media and a defined internal elastic lamella. From 35 weeks of gestation there is progressive fragmenta-tion of the internal elastic lamina. Small intimal cushions form which contribute to functional closure of the duct at birth. In the so-called postnatal persistent ductus arteriosus the internal elastic lamella is preserved. Arteries It is only in children and young adults that muscular arter-ies conform to the classical descriptions of textbooks. The intima of arteries is defined as the region from and including the endothelium to the luminal margin of the media. At birth, the intima is a virtual space with the endothelium closely opposed to the internal elastic lamella. This layer thickens slowly with age, either eccentrically at branch-ing points or bifurcations or diffusely. Both types occur preferentially at sites of altered blood flow or mechanical stress, suggesting that they are adaptive changes (a response to injury). Vascular smooth muscle cells derived from the underlying media and extracellular matrix proteins accumu-late in the thickened intima and may serve as a "soil" for the development of atherosclerotic plaques. For example, in the aorta and coronary arteries, the so-called atherosclerosisprone areas are those that show early diffuse or eccentric thickening. Progressive intimal fibrosis affects nearly all arteries, but in surgical pathology material it is espe-cially noticeable in the spleen, myometrium, and thyroid. As in the aorta, fragmentation of the elastic tissue, usually the internal elastic lamella, is common and is of no specific Significance. In some aging arteries, the internal lamella appears to repeatedly redupli-cate, producing a pattern of concentric intimal thickening. Small foci of calcification can be identified in otherwise normal vessels, usually just to the medial aspect of the internal elastic lamella. These aging changes, often loosely termed arteriosclerosis, have been studied most extensively in the coronary arteries, where women gener-ally show substantially less elastic fragmentation and inti-mal fibrosis than do men of the same age. About 75% of the mass of the media is smooth muscle cells. These run in a spiral or circumferential pattern around the wall. As in the intima the small amounts of associated collagen and elastin increase throughout life. Arteries dilate and become more tortuous with increasing age, and this has a fortuitous antiocclusive effect. The caliber of the coronary arteries in middle-aged and elderly women is less than that of men. This could contribute to the poorer results recorded in women after both coronary artery surgery and coronary interventions. If arterial dilatation is pronounced and A retrieved from the same patient, a 58-year-old man. Both arteries were used as coronary artery bypass grafts. These sections were made from redundant segments. irregular, as in the so-called coronary artery ectasia, sponta-neous thrombosis may result. Nutrients reach the media of elastic or muscular arteries by direct diffusion through the intima or via small branches, the vasa vasorum, which reenter the media from the adven-titial aspect. Vasa are best seen in biopsy samples taken from the ascending aorta during root repairs and some-times have remarkably thick muscular walls. In atheromatous arteries, there is often marked neovascular proliferation. Hemorrhage from these vessels contributes to the growth of lesions and their lipid content. A modified form of the American Heart Association classification of atheromatous lesions is now widely used in studies of both coronary and carotid arteries. There is much interest in the concept of the so-called vulnerable plaque: Plaques at high risk for development of superimposed thrombosis or plaque hemorrhage. Sev-eral postmortem studies of coronary arteries from patients with myocardial infarction or sudden cardiac death have shown that vulnerable lesions have specific features such as a large lipid core, a thin fibrous cap, and marked inflam-matory activity in the plaque tissue. Radiofrequency intravascular ultrasonography can identify and measure many structural features during coronary angiography. A prospective study of nearly 700 patients has shown that the lesions responsible for a second coronary event were usually thin fibrous cap atheromas. The pathology of recently symptomatic carotid plaques is similar to that of myometrium in a 52-year-old woman. Note the prominent calcification in A and the increased tortuosity in B. These changes have no importance. They can be seen in other sites, especially in thyroidectomy specimens. vasorum. The thin-walled vessel is a small vein. culprit coronary plaques, with strong correlations between macrophage instability and plaque instability. Arteries in chronically inflamed tissues and within tumors often show pronounced fibrous intimal thicken-ing, sometimes termed endarteritis obliterans. In the early stages of this process, the fibrous tissue has a loose histologic appearance, and the ground substance may be basophilic. Although inflammatory or tumor cells often closely surround the adventitia, they do not usually pen-etrate far into the muscular wall. These changes must be carefully distinguished from those of systemic vasculitis. In Lesion Histologic Features Pathologic intimal thickeningSmooth muscle cell proliferation, intimal fibrosis, extracellular lipid but no lipid core or necrosis Fibrous cap atheromaWell-formed lipid core with thick fibrous cap, free of inflammatory cells (>80 11mcoronary artery >200 11mcarotid artery) Thin fibrous cap atheromaThin cap of inflamed fibrous tissue with underlying lipid core Ruptured plaque Luminal thrombus communicating with lipid core via a ruptured fibrous cap Eroded plaque Luminal thrombus with endothelial ulceration; lipid core may be absent or small and does not communicate with lumen Calcified lesions Heavily calcified plaques with or without thrombus or lipid core This is a simplified version of the classification of Virmani R, Kolodgie FD, Burke AP, et al. Lessons from sudden cardiac death: a comprehensive morphological classification for atherosclerotic lesions. Arterioseler Thromb Vase 8io/2000;20:1262-1275.• I• -. .---.~- -. with systemic lupus erythematosus. Fibrinoid necrosis is not a feature of normal aging or uncomplicated hypertension. It always should be regarded as pathologic. In this case, the involved vessel is probably an arteriole. Note the small vein and capillary. general terms, vasculitis tends to affect vessels of a specific size, cause necrosis of vessel walls with associ-ated hemorrhage, and leads to tissue infarction. In healed vasculitis, there is irregular fibrosis of the muscular wall. Arterioles There are no specific histologic features that accurately dis-tinguish small arteries from larger arterioles. In the coro-nary circulation small arteries are said to have a diameter of greater than 500 urn, prearterioles a diameter of 500 to 100urnand true arterioles a diameter of less than 100 urn. Prearterioles are largely responsible for autoregulation of coronary blood flow whilst arterioles react to metabolic changes in the circulation. These are important physi-ologic differences but in biopsy material, there is so much variation in the contours of these small vessels that accurate distinction is often impossible and probably unnecessary. Larger arterioles have an obvious media and an adventitial layer of connective tissue. In the smallest arterioles, an internal elastic lamella may not be identified. The smooth muscle cells are arranged circumferentially, each cell winding around the wall several times. This is the structural basis of the precapillary sphincter. Small arteri-oles have a very thin adventitia but are richly supplied by sympathetic nerve fibers. Hyalinization is a common lesion of arterioles and small arteries and increases with age and in conditions such as hypertension and diabetes. The glassy uniform appearance is the result of accumulation of a variety of plasma proteins and small amounts of lipids. As in arteries, reduplication of elastic tissue and intimal fibrosis are common changes in the aged. In severe long-standing benign hypertension and in the malignant phase, the arteriolar lumen can be substantially narrowed by concentric layers of fibrous tis-sue and smooth muscle cells, changes that are outside the this biopsy was performed. A.The low-power view shows irregular thickening of the wall and a loss of about 50% of the internal elastic lamella. B.This higher-power view shows fresh fibrous scarring of the media. Changes such as these are not part of the normal aging process. normal range of aging. Fibrinoid necrosis of the arteriolar media is the hallmark of malignant hypertension and some forms of acute vasculitis. It must always be regarded as pathologic. In the earliest changes of diabetic micro angiopathy, arterioles and capillaries often show prominent basement membrane thickening. This thickening can be readily identified in renal and peripheral nerve biopsies. Although there is physiologic evidence of small vessel disease in the heart and the peripheral vascula-ture, characteristic histologic changes of diabetic micro an-giopathyare seldom seen in these sites. In diabetes the amounts of type IV collagen and laminin are increased, but the proteoglycan component of the basement membrane is reduced. Albumin and immunoglobulins accumulate in these abnormal basement membranes, binding to glycosyl-ated protein residues and contributing to the overall eosino-philic appearance. Capillaries, Sinusoids, Venules, and Lymphatics Capillaries, sinusoids, and small venules are collectively termed exchange vessels and with arteri-oles form the microvascular bed, the structural basis of the microcirculation. In contrast to arterioles, capillaries have neither a muscular media nor an elastic lamella. A single but complete layer of endothelial cells lies on a base-ment membrane whose thickness varies from site to site. Basement membrane thickness increases with age, almost doubling in muscle capillaries from 10 to 70 years of age.There is no adventitial fibrous tissue support peripheral to this, but pericytes are present in and among the basement membrane. It is difficult to identify pericytes in routine sections, but they are easily seen by electron microscopy and, of course, stain with certain actin antibodies, espe-cially the. They provide structural support; and, because they contain sev-eral forms of myosin, they may be able to regulate blood flow. It is likely that they are involved in the synthesis of vascular basement membrane and are capable of phago-cytosis. It is generally accepted that the turnover of peri-cytes is increased in the capillaries of diabetics, and this may contribute to the development of small vessel disease. Pericytes may also have a role in the control of peripheral insulin activity. The endothelium of capillaries may have circular fen-estrations that act as pores through the full thickness of the endothelial cell. Fenestrations are especially prominent in renal glomerular endothelial cells and are found in the intestinal mucosa, skin, and endocrine glands. In contrast, fenestrations are poorly developed or absent in brain, mus-cle, lung, and connective tissue. In certain sites, such as the liver, spleen, pituitary, adre-nals, and bone marrow, the vessels that connect arterioles and venules are known as sinusoids rather than capillar-ies. With diameters of up to 30 to 40 11m,they are gener-ally more distended than capillaries. They have prominent fenestrations, but there are also Significant gaps between endothelial cells. In the liver, there is no significant associ-ated basement membrane. The transition from venous capillary to muscular ven-ule and small collecting vein is characterized by the gradual acquisition of a muscular media. The paracortical or high endothelial venules of lymph nodes have an important role in T-Iymphocyte recirculation. The endothelial cells of postcapillary venules have a prominent cuboidal or colum-nal appearance, usually with an ovoid nucleus and a single central nucleolus. They stain specifically with the HECA-452 antibody. At the light microscopic level, small lymphatics closely resemble capillaries. In general terms, lymphatics have a larger diameter and a less regular cross-sectional profile. They begin as dilated channels with closed ends and anastomose freely. Small lymphatics have an incomplete basal lamina and lack pericytes or tight junctions. They are permeable to large proteins, cell debris, and microorgan-isms. Lymphatic channels have numerous valves and are often slightly distended at these sites, producing a slightly beaded appearance. Large lymphatics, such as the thoracic duct have a thin muscular media, with no clear division into circular or longitudinal coats, and a fibrous adventitia. A longitudinal muscular layer is present in the right lym-phatic and thoracic ducts. Although lymphatics are present in most tissues, they are rarely found in the epidermis, nails, cornea, articular cartilage, central nervous system, or bone marrow. As detailed and illustrated later, lymphatic vessels stain specifically with the antibodies, D2-40 and LYVE-I and VEGFR-3. Veins The primary function of veins is to return blood to the heart via the vena cavae. They also act as a capacitance reservoir for the vascular system, especially in the splanch-nic system. In comparison to arteries of a similar diameter they have much thinner walls with a circular layer of mus-cle. In the saphenous, iliac, brachiocephalic, portal and renal veins and the vena cavae there is also a longitudinal muscular layer but these can be difficult to distinguish in surgical histology sections. Placental, dural, and retinal veins and the veins of erectile tissue have very little muscle. In general, the veins of the lower limb have thicker walls than those of the arm and abdomen. Most veins have valves to prevent the reflux of blood (Figure 9.11). In larger veins there is a well developed fibrous adventitia. Some veins are tethered to surrounding con-nective tissue fascia. The increasing use of the saphenous vein as an arterial conduit has led to a greater understanding of the normal structure of larger veins and the changes that occur in them as a result of aging. The connective tissue adventitia is often well developed. Saphenous veins in middle-aged and elderly patients show intimal fibrosis and longitudinal and circular muscle hypertrophy with a substantial increase in medial connective tissue. These changesmust be distinguished from the form of atherosclerosis that develops in vein bypass grafts. Pulmonary Arteries and Veins Although the basic histologic structure of pulmonary ves-sels resembles that of their systemic counterparts, there are differences that reflect the much lower pressure of the pulmonary circuit. The lumina of major pulmonary arter-ies are widely dilated in comparison with wall thickness. The intima is hardly discernible. In an adult, the pulmonary arterial media is composed of only 10 to 15 parallel elastic lamellae, whereas, even in a young child, 40 aortic lamellae can be identified. The thickness of the pulmonary trunk is about 40 to 80% that of the aorta. In the systemic circulation, the transition from elastic to muscular arteries is abrupt and is usually at the point of a major arterial orifice. In contrast, even pulmonary arteries as small as 1 mm in diameter are elastic vessels. Smaller pulmonary arteries and arterioles have a thin layer of mus-cle enclosed by both an internal and an external layer of elastic tissue. Arterioles give rise to a rich network of alveolar capil-laries. Pericytes are not easily identified, and in places the endothelium and alveolar epithelium appear to share a common basement membrane. The walls of pulmonary veins are less structured than their systemic counterparts. The media is composed of a rather haphazardly arranged but roughly circular layer of connective tissue and muscle. No distinct and continuous elastic lamellae are present, and valves are said to be absent. It can be very difficult to distinguish small pulmonary arteries and veins. We agree with others who feel that a certain distinction can only be made if the vessel can be clearly seen to be draining in a larger artery or vein. Itcan also be difficult to distinguish the early vascular changes of pulmonary hypertension from those of normal aging. The initial changes in both conditions include intimal fibrosis and medial muscular hypertrophy, and each of these features is most prominent in muscu-lar arteries and larger arterioles. The absence of sig-nificant changes in the larger arteries may be misleading. In long-standing pulmonary hypertension, the complex changes in muscular arteries include florid intimal thick-ening, marked medial hypertrophy, and prominent dilata-tion of small branches of parent vessels. In the most extreme examples, angiomatoid malformations may develop, and occasionally there is fibrinoid necrosis of the vessel wall. Mooi and Grunberg have summarized and extensively illustrated the current WHO classification of pulmonary hypertensive diseases. Lung biopsy is no longer used for the assessment of pulmonary hypertension in children with congenital heart disease nor in adults with primary pulmonary hypertension. However surgical pathol-ogists must make a careful assessment of the pulmonary arteries and veins in lung biopsy specimens and be able to describe and grade these alterations accurately. is no significant intimal thickening, and a thin internal elastic lamella can be identified. Note the thin layer of subendothelial collagen. The muscular wall is composed of coarse fascicles, which are not clearly arranged into circular and longitudinal layers. B. Detail of the wall of the proximal saphenous vein. In contrast to renal vein the media is composed of distinct layers of circular and longitudinal smooth muscles. C. Cross section of normal saphenous vein. This vein is commonly used by cardiovascular surgeons for arterial bypass grafting procedures. There is a regular pattern of alternating muscle layers with some fibrous tissue and scant elastin. Note the valvular structures in the lumen of the vein. D. Vein affected by phlebosclerosis, showing cushions of intimal thickening fibrosis of the media and marked fibrotic thickening of the valves. Aging changes in pulmonary vessels are seldom described in detail. In severe, long-standing cardiac fail-ure, intimal fibrosis, medial hypertrophy, and hyalinization are prominent pulmonary venous abnormalities. Marked medial hypertrophy may confer an arterialized appearance to pulmonary veins, and they may appear to have an internal and an external elastic lamina. Multiple levels should be taken and stained for elastin and by a trichrome method. The elastic lamellae are seldom complete in these abnormal veins, and there is often more medial fibrosis than in corre-sponding pulmonary arteries. Even so, accurate distinction of abnormal pulmonary arteries and veins can be difficult. Extensions of atrial myocardium are a common finding in pulmonary veins and the vena cavae close to their junction with the heart. Abnor-mal electrical activity associated with these sleeves cause ectopic beats and atrial arrhythmias, especially when the sleeves are fibrosed or infiltrated with amyloid in the elderly. Anastomoses, Angiodysplasias, and Vascular Malformations There is potential for anastomoses between many arteries and veins. They vary in size from about 200 to 800 11mand in some sites, such as the nail bed, have a complex struc-ture. Occasionally, small arteriovenous anastomosis is seen in resection specimens. In the anal canal they form the so-called "anal glomeruli." In the anal canal, uterus and bladder venous plexuses may be composed of prominent conglom-erates of venous channels. It may be difficult to distinguish nary artery, which therefore appears much larger than the corresponding bronchus. B.A magnified view ofthe elastic wall. C.The transition from elastic to muscular pulmonary arteries in a 73-year-old man. Note the larger number of elastic lamellae. There is slight fibrous intimal thickening only (elastic van Gieson). D.A small pulmonary artery from a patient with long-standing pulmonary hypertension and chronic obstructive airways disease. There is hypertrophy of the muscular wall and pronounced fibrous intimal thick-ening. Vessel Normal Age-related Changes Pulmonary Hypertension Elastic arteriesWidely patent lumen, media of 10 to 15 parallel lamellae of elastic tissueSlight intimal fibrosis; increased medial thickness due to occasional atheromatous plaquesAtherosclerosis and dilation of main pulmonary arteries; medial thickening due to hypertrophy of admixed muscular elements Muscular arteries or arteriolesThin muscular wall often with distinct internal and external elastic laminaeIncreased muscular media, eccentric intimal fibrosis, especially in vessels less than 300urnin diameterComplex changes include florid intimal thickening, medial hypertrophy, dilation of small branches, angiomatoid lesions, and fibrinoid necrosis Veins Thin media of irregularly arranged fibrous tissue and muscle. No distinct elastic lamella. No valves.Few detailed studies. The media may appear hyalinized.Intimal fibrosis, medial muscular hypertrophy-occasionally sufficient to mimic appearance of arteries these highly vascularized areas from angiodysplasias or hamaromatous vascular lesions. This is often the case in intestinal resections for ischaemia or hem-orrhage, especially when there is prominent vasocongestion. Biopsies of the nasal mucosa, clitoris, and deep parts of the glans penis may include erectile vascular tissue. Highly vascular areas of interconnected vessels with aberrant smooth muscle bundles may be mistaken for angiomas or malformation, especially if there is inadequate clinical infor-mation. There are also anastomoses betweenFIGURE 9.13 Normal pulmonary veins. A.A pulmonary venule draining into a small vein. Very little muscle is present in the wall. B.A large pulmonary vein close to the hilum of the lung (Gomori's trichrome). pulmonary and bronchial veins and between the portal and systemic circulations. The potential connections between the portal and systemic circulations, either in the submucosa of the esophagus or rectum or in the periumbilical or diaphrag-matic region, may be massively dilated in advanced hepatic disease. Biopsies are seldom performed surgically. Peripheral glomus tumors almost certainly arise from supporting cells that surround the normal but rather complex anastomosing channels between digital arterioles and venules. Glomus cells do not express endothelial markers but, because they cle in a small pulmonary artery. B.An early plexiform lesion with nearby dilated thin-walled branches. a pulmonary vein close to the left atrial wall. Note the extensions of myocardial tissue along the outer aspect of vein. These myo-cardial sleeves are important sites for generation of atrial arrhythmias, especially in the elderly when the sleeves develop fibrosis or amyloid deposits.stain with smooth muscle actin and vimentin, may be related to vascular smooth muscle. Surgical pathologists must be familiar with the normal vascular patterns of the cerebral meninges and the colonic submucosa if cerebral arteriovenous malformations and large intestinal angiodysplasia are to be accurately assessed. Each of these areas has a rich vascular supply with numer-ous, sometimes thick-walled, venous channels. Malforma-tions or angiodysplasias must only be diagnosed if there is undoubted evidence of an abnormal vessel wall. Aging changes and atherosclerosis seldom involve the smaller lep-tomeningeal arteries. In arteries, eccentric fibrous intimal thickening or disruption of the elastic lamellae support a diagnosis of a malformation. Veins in these malformations have irregular contours, the thickness of their muscular wall may vary markedly, and the wall can be uniformly fibrosed. Angiodysplasia of the colon is an important cause of lower gastrointestinal hemorrhage. The lesions are usu-ally present on the antimesenteric border of the cecum, often close to the ileocecal valve. They are not direct confused with angiomas or vascular malformations. A.Atrophic ovary. B.Hemorrhoidal tissue in the anorectal region. C.Dilated vessels in the submucosa of colonic resection from a patient with ischemic bowel disease. walled blood vessels in the submucosa. Although these vessels are distended, their basic structure is unaltered. arteriovenous anastomoses but rather dilatations of pre-existing, and previously normal, capillary rings and veins. The dilatation of these vessels may be the result of increased colonic muscular pressure caus-ing intermittent obstruction of draining vessels. Multiple blocks must be examined and the appearances contrasted with a control section of submucosa from a normal colon. Submucosal arteries of the large intestine may show pro-nounced age-related tortuosity, and this must not be inter-preted as an abnormality. A proportion of cases with good clinical or radiologic evidence of angiodysplasia will not be confirmed histologically. Some cases of massive gastroin-testinal hemorrhage result from abnormally large submu-cosal arteries. This is most common in the stomach but also has been reported in the large and small intestines. Arteries in the submucosa of the proximal portion of the stomach can arise directly from omental vessels and may have a larger caliber than superficial arteries arising from a submucosal plexus, the so-called caliber-persistent artery or Dieulafoy's lesion. Vascular malformations are congenital lesions com-posed of mature but often malformed blood vessels. They result from dysregulation in the signalling pathways of vasculogenesis in early embryonic life, especially members of the transforming growth factor beta family. They must be distinguished from true angiomas and reactive hyperplasias. They may be solitary lesions or be part of a dysmorphic syndrome and grow slowly but progres-sively, usually commensurate with the growth of the patient. They are classified according to the size of the predominate type of vessel, the so-called Mulliken and Glowacki clas-sification. Clinically, a distinction is made between slow- and high-flow lesions. Slow-flow lesions are usually venous malformations. High-flow lesions are usually arteriovenous malformations characterized by connectionsbetween feeding arteries and draining veins, without an interconnecting capillary bed, the so-called arteriovenous fistula. Fistulae are rarely found in tissue sections; but in these lesions arteries have a tortuous course, and a pro-portion of veins may show intimal thickening with collagen and elastin deposition in their walls. Pure venous malforma-tions are composed of dilated vascular channels with walls of variable size, showing irregular degrees of attenuation and fibrosis. Complications include thrombosis with orga-nization, papillary endothelial hyperplasia (Masson's pseu-dotumor), and nodular calcification. In lymphatic malfor-mations, the vascular channels vary considerably in size and may have an incomplete muscular wall. As in other vessels their endothelium stains with CD31 and CD34 antibodies and with factor VIII-related antigen. Vascular Surgery The changes commonly seen in vessels after surgical proce-dures and interventions are summarized in Table 9.5. Procedure Spectrum of Histologic Change Endarterectomy Acutely: Surface platelet and fibrin deposits on inner face of surgical dissection, occasionally progressing to occlusive thrombosis. Chronically: Variable degrees of fibrous intimal hyperplasia, occasionally progressing to restenosis. "False" aneurysm formation. Vein bypass grafting Acutely: Thrombosis, dissection at anastomosis site. Chronically: Dilatation with fibrous intimal thickening and medial muscular hypertrophy (to be contrasted with preimplant state). Occasionally, marked intimal fibrosis with lipid deposition and hemorrhage, leading to occlusion ("vein atherosclerosis"). Internal mammary and radial artery graftingAcutely: Thrombosis at anastomoses sites. Chronically: Occasional grafts become fibrosed. Graft atherosclerosis uncommon. Angioplastyand stentingAcutely: Acute inflammation, dissection, and thrombosis. Chronically: Restenosis due to reactive fibrous intimal thickening, now reduced by drug eluting stents. Prosthetic vessels Acutely: Thrombotic occlusion. Chronically: Extensive macrophage and giant cell infiltration of fabric wall. Formation of fibrin-rich pseudointima, occasionally progressing to partial or complete occlusion. Graft failure and thrombosis. Endarterectomy Patency can be restored to a partially occluded artery by drawing out a proportion of the atherosclerotic intima. The procedure is usually applied to the carotid bifurcation but occasionally to iliac, femoral, or even coronary arteries. Meta-analysis has confirmed that carotid endarterectomy is highly beneficial in symptomatic patients with 70% +ath-eromatous stenosis. Ideally, the surgeon should estab-lish a plane between the innermost media and the intima, and the atheromatous material should be removed in its entirety At its bifurcation the carotid artery has an elastic wall, and the material removed will include layers of elastic tissue, atheromatous debris, and thrombus. Stroke is the most important immediate complication of the procedure and is usually the result of acute thrombosis or thrombo-embolism. Longer-term complications are recurrent throm-bosis, aneurysmal dilatation, and restenosis due to fibrous intimal proliferation. Bypass Grafts The clinical and pathologic changes that occur in autologous saphenous vein bypass grafts have been described in detail. Care must be taken to distinguish the pathologic changes from those associated with nor-mal aging. When subjected to arterial pressure, many vein grafts dilate and most develop some fibrous intimal thick-ening and medial muscular hypertrophy. In time, many develop pronounced fibrous intimal thickening with areas of lipid deposition, intramural hemorrhage, and thrombosis. These appearances closely mimic atherosclerosis and are an important cause of graft failure. In one postmortem study in which saphenous vein conduits were sampled throughout their length, more than 75% narrowing was demonstrated in 11 to 26% of the segments examined. Intensive lipid lowering therapy can attenuate graft atherosclerosis. External synthetic sheaths are sometimes placed around vein grafts and may prevent vein wall thickening. Careful surgical harvesting of vein grafts may minimize damage to the endothelial layer. Grafts can sometimes be dilated by angioplasty, but redo coronary bypass procedures are now a significant part of the work of all cardiac surgery departments. In cardiac surgery, coronary artery stenoses are routinely bypassed with the left or the right internal mammary artery. The origin of the artery from the subclavian artery is pre-served, and it is then dissected away from the chest wall. There is usually a surrounding cuff of soft tissue, but some surgeons dissect this away, producing a so-called "skeletal-ized" graft. Long-term patency rates are superior to saphenous vein grafts. The caliber of the normal internal mammary artery is similar to that of distal coronary arteries. Pre-existing occlusive disease is present in fewer than 5% of patients, and only occasional grafts develop atheromatous obstructions. In its proximal portion, the internal mammary is an elastic artery, but the media is muscular from about the level of the fourth rib.Segments of the radial artery are also used as free grafts. Like saphenous vein grafts, they are anastomosed proxi-mally to the aortic root and distally to the coronary arteries. The radial artery is muscular and is invariably free of signifi-cant atheroma. An gi 0pia sty Percutaneous coronary angioplasty with stent emplacement is now the treatment of choice for many proximal coronary stenoses and is increasingly used as a primary intervention to open thrombosed coronary arteries after myocardial infarction. The mortality rate in most centers is now less than 1%, and over 90% of procedures are initially successful. The design of stents and the antiprolif-erative agents that they release undergo continual modifica-tion and development. In order to dilate the vessel, the heavily fibrous and focally calcified atheromatous plaque must be cracked open. Only when this has occurred can the deeper intima and underlying media be distended by the inflated bal-loon and held open by the expandable metallic stent. Early histologic studies of patients dying soon after angio-plasty demonstrated a characteristic pattern of radial tears or splits, sometimes with dissections extending into the underlying media. Stents minimize the complications of these changes. Stent thrombosis occurs in about 1%of patients within a year of stent implantation. Antiprolifer-ative agents released from drug eluting stents may inhibit endothelialization of the stent struts. Restenosis is the result of fibrous intimal proliferation, thrombus for-mation, and an overall reduction in the size of the vessel lumen. These changes can now be visualized by either intravascular ultrasound or optical coherence tomogra-phy. These provide a virtual histology image of the arte-rial wall. Ifdeath occurs soon after the procedure, the stent can be carefully extracted from the opened artery which is then processed in the usual way. After late closure, stents can be cut with an electric diamond saw and then embedded in hard plastic. A technique for dissolving metallic stents has also been developed. Prosthetic Vessels Vascular surgeons use vanous techiques to anastomose grafts to native vessels. Grafts made of Dacron are successful in large caliber bypass procedures such as aorto-iliac grafting. Expanded polytetrafluorethylene is preferred for below knee grafts and in the construction of arteriovenous fistu-lae for chronic hemodialysis. However long-term patency rates are poor. At present prosthetic grafts are not used to bypass coronary stenosis. Acute thrombotic occlusion of prosthetic vessels is usually the result of surgical tech-nique or poor flow rates. The many factors that contrib-ute to chronic failure include inherent thrombogenicity secondary to lack of an endothelial lining and compliance neointimal tissue that caused restenosis. The stent was cut with a diamond saw. This leaves the metal struts more or less in place, although some distortion is inevitable. B.Histology of the same artery after plastic embedding shows the stent struts at the interface of fibrocellular intimal tissue and pre-existent calcified atherosclerotic plaque. C.Macroscopic view of cross section through coronary artery with stent affected by thrombotic occlusion. D. Detail of the histology of the same segment after plastic embedding, showing black stent strut and empty spaces adjacent to fresh thrombus. mismatch between the graft and the native vessel. In time, prosthetic grafts develop a pseudointima. This has a jellylike consistency and is composed of fibrin and enmeshed leukocytes. Itmay develop a partial endothe-lial lining. The most striking feature of these prosthetic vessels is the intense mononuclear and giant cell reac-tion that develops around the woven fibers of the graft. There is usually a moderate degree of adventitial fibrosis that binds the prosthesis to the surrounding tissues and reduces its elasticity. Long-term complications include thrombosis, particularly at flexures or surgical anastomo-ses, infection, and deterioration of the fibers of the graft. Modifications under study in industry include coating grafts with anticoagulants such as heparin, thrombomod-ulin, or hirudin, seeding grafts with endothelial cells or incorporating nitric oxide into grafts.ELECTRON MICROSCOPY Ultrastructural studies have made enormous contributions to our understanding of vascular biology. However, even sur-gical pathologists with a specific interest in vascular pathol-ogy have only limited experience and expertise in electron microscopy. Some of the most important ultrastructural fea-tures of vessels are summarized in Table 9.6. Endothelial Cells The entire vascular system is lined internally by a single layer of rather spindle-shaped endothelial cells. Small fin-gerlike microvilli, 200 to 400 nm long, may be seen on the surface of endothelial cells. A thin network of membrane-bound proteoglycans and glycoproteins, the glycocalyx, Endothelial cells are joined by tight, adherans, or gap junctions. Transendothelial channels characterize fenestrated endothelium, as in hepatic sinusoids, glomeruli, and endocrine organs. Cytoplasmic inclusions of endothelium include Iysosomes, plasmalemmal vesicles, and Weibel-Palade bodies. Capillary endothelium is surrounded by basement membrane in which pericytes are embedded. There is very little basement membrane around lymphatic vessels. There are direct appositions between processes of pericytes and endothelium through gaps in the basement membrane. Smooth muscle cells are invested in basement membrane and are linked by communicating junctions. Elastin and collagen fibers may be closely opposed to the surfaces of smooth muscle cells. No significant media in small arterioles, capillaries, or lymphatics. The adventitia is composed of collagen and some elastin fibers. It has a well-developed structure in large veins but is very thin in some arteries. coats the luminal surface of the endothelium. It varies in thickness from 0.5 urnin small capillaries to 4.5 urnin the carotid artery. The glycocalyx has important roles in vas-cular permeability, blood cell vessel wall interactions, and shear stress sensing. For example, the glycocalyx modulates inflammatory reactions by binding cytokine molecules and superoxide dismutase and can influence coagulation by binding proteins such as antithrombin III, thrombomodu-lin, and inhibitors of tissue factor. Glycocalyx proteins are responsible for transmission of shear stress signals into specific processes such as nitric oxide production (mecha-notransduction). There is growing evidence that the glyco-calyx is attenuated or absent in pathologic conditions such as atherosclerosis, diabetes, ischemia-reperfusion injury and smoking. Although endothelial cells have relatively sparse endoplasmic reticulum, a small number of free ribo-somes, and an inconspicuous Golgi apparatus they produce a variety of molecules that are important in blood coagula-tion and the regulation of vascular tone. Junctional complexes between endothelial cells are tight, adherens, or gap junctions. Tight junctions have a barrier function and help to maintain cell polarity. A variety of molecules, notably those of the claudin family create the barrier and regulate electrical resistance between cells. Loss of this barrier function may be important in disorders such as diabetic retinopathy and in a variety of skin diseases. Adherens junctions regulate permeability to white cells and soluble molecules and have a role in contact inhibition. Gap junctions are assembled from proteins known as connexins and form channels between adjacent cells. Alterations in gap junction proteins have been documented in human heart disease, including arrhythmias and cardiomyopathies. Inclusions of Endothelial Cells Lysosomes are readily identified in most endothelial cells and are involved in intracytoplasmic digestion of foreignFIGURE 9.19 Transmission electron micrograph of an endothelial cell from a small subcutaneous capillary. Plasmalemmal vesicles (caveo-lae) are present on the abluminal surface. There are con-spicuous Weibel-Palade bodies. Only part of the endothelial cell nucleus is included. debris and products of metabolism. In many areas of the vascular system, membrane-bound vesicles measuring up to 80 to 90 nm can be identified. They are most prominent on the abluminal surface of the endothelial cell. They were originally known as plasmalemmal vesicles but are now termed caveolae. Their functions include the sequestration and concentration of small molecules, and they contribute to the endothelial barrier function, regu-lation of nitric oxide synthesis, and cholesterol metabo-lism. Weibel-Palade bodies are elongated secretory organelles specific to endothelial cells. Von Wille brand factor is stored inside Weibel-Palade bodies as tubules, but on its release forms long strings that recruit platelets to sites of endothelial injury. The permeability of capillaries varies considerably from organ to organ. In some sites, such as the renal glomerulus, the hepatic sinusoids, the small intestine, and some endocrine glands, there is a rapid interchange between blood and the surrounding tissue. Some of these permeability differences are related to the exact nature of the junctions between endo-thelial cells, but endothelial fenestrae also have an important role in this respect. These fenestrations are in fact the open-ings of irregular, and sometimes incomplete, trans endothelial channels that allow the rapid interchange of fluid between the blood vessel lumen and the interstitium. lamellarunitswithregularthickelastic lamellaewithnumeroussmallextensions.Smoothmuscleis present inthe interlamellar space B.Marfan'ssyndrome. There is distinctthinningandfragmentationof bothelastic lamellae.There is an increase in fibrillary collagenand mucoiddeposits in the matrixof the interlamellar space. Media In the human aorta, homogeneous parallel elastic lamellae alternate with layers containing smooth muscle cells and a variety of extracellular components. Smooth muscle pre-dominates in muscular arteries. The power of contraction of smooth muscle is as great as skeletal muscle and can be maintained for longer periods with greater shortening. The structure of smooth muscle cells is maintained by the inter-mediate filaments vimentin and desmin, and the contractile forces are generated by actin and myosin filaments. Smooth muscle cells are arranged in parallel longitudinal bundles with the wide part of one cell opposed to the tapering part of another. Each smooth muscle cell is cov-ered by a basal lamina which merges with fine collagen and elastin fibers. Individual smooth muscle cells are often linked by communicating junctions, but tight junctions are not generally seen. In the microcirculation and in some larger arteries and arterioles, there are gap junctions between the smooth muscle cells and the overlying endothelium. These myoendothelial junctions could have an impor-tant role in relaying physiologic or pharmacologic stimuli between the blood vessel lumen and the media. Adventitia and Supporting Cells The adventitial layer consists almost entirely of collagen and elastic fibers. The thickness of this layer varies with the size of the vessel, and it may be continuous with the sur-rounding connective tissue. In some medium-sized veins, it is particularly well developed but in cerebral arteries may be as thin as 80 urn. A layer of elastic tissue, the external elastic lamella, is present at the junction of the media and adventitia. In human material, it is seldom as pronounced as the internal elastic lamella but is prominent in many other mammalian arteries. The pericytes that are present in and among the basement membrane of capillaries and smallvenules superficially resemble fibroblasts. The ultrastruc-tural appearance of their cytoplasmic filaments suggests that they are contractile, and this is further evidence that they are of mesenchymal origin. Lymphatics and Veins The smallest lymphatic vessels have wider lumina than blood capillaries and a discontinuous basement membrane. A variety of anchoring filaments bind the lymphatic endo-thelium to the surrounding collagenous tissues, perhaps providing the sort of support normally produced by base-ment membrane and enmeshed pericytes in capillaries. The ultrastructural appearances of venous capillaries, venules, and small veins mirror those seen at the light microscopic level. ANTIGEN EXPRESSION OF NORMAL AND NEOPLASTIC VASCULAR TISSUE Endothelium Endothelial cells cover the inner surface of the entire vascu-lar tree, arterial, venous, capillary, and lymphatic. Ongoing research on endothelial cells has revealed marked heteroge-neity among the endothelium. There are differences in the size, shape, orientation, and antigen expression between arterial and venous endothelium. Within the heart there are differences between endothelia in the epicardial arteries, the endocardium, and myocardial capillaries. Several genes have been identified that are preferentially expressed in either arterial or venous endothelium. Anincreasing panel of mono-clonal antibodies is available to investigate aspects of this heterogeneity, some of which may have a role in pathology. At present the most widely used antibodies are directed against factor VIII, CD31, and CD34. Since these illustrations, the staining with CD34 is usually sharper than with factor VIII. Some non-specific extravas-cular staining is often seen with factor VIII but has no significance. these antigens are present in all types of endothelial cells, they are considered to be pan endothelial markers. The lec-tin Ulex europaeus 1 agglutinin binds to some a-L-fructose containing glycocompounds and therefore to virtually all human endothelia. The staining pattern is sometimes more intense than with factor VIII antibodies, especially in imma-ture vessels. However, all endothelial markers cross-react to some extent with other cell components. For example, in areas of hemorrhage or thrombosis, CD31 reacts strongly with platelets, macrophages, and lymphocytes. In diseased tissues such as thin-walled microvessels in atherosclerotic plaque and at sites of vasculitis, factor VIII antibodies can produce distinct diffuse extracellular staining patterns, due to leakiness of the endothelium. In everyday practice these antibodies are indispensable for the iden-• Atification of vascular tumors such as angiomas, heman-gioendotheliomas, and angiosarcomas and can be helpful in confirming that tumor deposits are in vascular or lym-phatic channels, rather than in artifactual tissue spaces. Antibodies that recognize proteins involved in the early steps in angiogenesis include antiendoglin and anti-VEGF. CD105 is an interesting epitope, since it expressed on activated endothelial cells, especially under conditions of hypoxia. Increased expression is noted on the microvessels of tumors such as glioma and breast carcinoma and also non-neoplastic situations such as the microvessels that develop in the hypoxic environment deep in long-standing atherosclerotic plaques. In carcinomas of the breast a relationship between microvascular CD105 -;  •  • • .' plexus showing sharp endothelial immunostaining. B. Microvessel of the superior dermal vascular plexus in case of cutaneous small vessel vasculitis. There is prominent perivascular staining due to leakage of factor VIII from damaged vessels. eral empty vascular channels. Note that the spaces containing the tumor deposits do stain positively with CD3l. However D2-40 immunostaining,which is specific for lymphatic endothelium, confirms that the tumor deposits are within lymphatics rather than tissue spaces. expression and invasive potential of the tumor has been observed, which appears to correlate with poor outcomes. In different sites in the vascular system, the endothelium may show marked heterogeneity in mor-phology, gene expression patterns, and related differences in functional status. Antibodies to glucose transporter pro-tein-I react with the endothelium of cerebral capillaries, the placental vasculature, and one specific type of angioma-the juvenile capillary angioma. Another site-specific antibody is anti-HECA 452, which reacts specifically with the plump endo-thelial cells of high endothelial venules in lymphoid tissue and postcapillary venules in chronically inflamed tissue. In inflamed tissues and in atheroma-tous lesions, endothelial cells undergo profound functionalalterations associated with upregu-lation of cell surface adhesion molecules such as ICAM-1, VCAM-I, and PECAM or with de novo expression of leukocyte adhesion molecules such as E-selectin. D2-40, LYVE-I and VEGFR3 stain lymphatic endothelium specifi-cally, and D2-40 staining has confirmed the lymphatic origin of Kaposi's sarcoma. Smooth Muscle Biochemical and immunohistologic studies have demon-strated that vascular smooth muscle has a distinctive com-ponent of contractile and intermediate filament proteins. In most smooth muscles, "{-smooth muscle actin and desmin predominate. In contrast, in vascular tissue there is abundant a-smooth muscle actin, and vimentin exceeds J microvessels. There is expression of endoglinin only a subfraction of the microvessels. lary hemangioma from a 3-year-old male is specifically stained with the GLUT-l antibody. This anti-body also stains the endothelium of cerebral capillaries and the placenta. In contrast, the more commonly used endothelial antibodies such as factor VIII, C031, and C034 stain most types of normal and neoplastic endothelia. cutaneous tissues of a 68-year-old female from close to a leg ulcer: C031 antibody staining identifies many vascular spaces, and a similar section is stained with the antibody 02-40, which recognizes lymphatic endothelium only. C and 0 are from a nodular inflammatory infiltrate in the aortic adventitia adjacent to a large atheromatous plaque: C has been stained with C031, which recognizes most vessels, and 0 was stained with HECA-452, which recognizes high endothelial venules. a specific marker of the lymphatic endothelium. Note the strong positive staining; LYVE-l is another antibody that specifically stains lymphatic endothelium. desmin. Antibodies directed against smooth muscle actin are excellent markers of medial muscle; SMA-l recognizes the full spectrum of proliferating and mature smooth muscle phenotypes. As SMA-l reacts with pericytes, it clearly outlines capillariesin reactive microvascular proliferations and in pyogenic granulomas and juvenile angiomas during their growth phase. Generally all benign vascular proliferations, includ-ing glomus tumors, stain strongly with SMA-l antibodies. In contrast, this staining is often incomplete proliferation. Note the intense staining of the walls of these small vessels. Band 0 are from an angiosarcoma. Only small amounts of actin are present in the walls of the malignant blood vessels. the edge of a lesion. B.Macrophages react for C06S. or even absent in angiosarcoma, hemangiopericytoma, or Kaposi's sarcoma. SMA-1 immunostaining can be helpful in the detection of early organization of thromboembolic material, especially in situations where age determination of the thrombus is required, for example investigations on sudden cardiac death, pulmonary embolism and in medico-legal autopsies). Other Useful Antibodies for Diagnostic Vascular Pathology Immunohistochemical studies of the inflammatory infil-trates in atheromatous lesions have contrib-uted greatly to our understanding of the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis but, as yet, have no value in everyday surgical pathology. T-Iymphocyte markers, such as CD3 and CD4, may be of use in the diagnosis of vasculitis, especially temporal arteritis with minimal inflammatory activity. In transplant arteriosclerosis, there is a high relative propor-tion of CD8+ T lymphocytes, which also express granzyme B. In addition to anti-factor VIII antibodies, antifibrinogen antibodies are excellent for the demonstration of vascular leakiness and tissue damage; CD61 stains plate-let aggregates in microvessels [eg, in small vessel vasculi-tis], angiolipomas, and coagulopathies (such as in the antiphospholipid syndrome). Glycophorin A is a specific marker of erythrocytes and their precursors in the bone mar-row. The epitopes are preserved in tissues for long periods, and the antibody is valuable in the detection of old hem-orrhage; for example, in completely organized pulmonary thromboemboli and in atherosclerotic plaques. Anti-amyloid antibodies (anti-amyloid A, anti-immuno-globulin antibodies) are used to differentiate the nature of amyloid depositions, which have a preferential distribution in vessel walls. Cerebral vascular amyloid deposits usually do not stain with these antibodies. In pathologic conditions, such as cerebral amyloid angiopathy or amyloid found occa-sionally in cerebral vascular malformations, the depositions show positive staining with anti-Beamyloid antibody.REFERENCES 1. Ferrari AU, Radaelli A, Centola M. Invited review: aging and the cardiovascular system. ] Appl Physiol 2003;95:2591-2597. 2. Plante CE. Impact of aging on the body's vascular system. Metaholism 2003;52:31-35. 3. Lakatta EC, Levy D. Arterial and cardiac aging: major share-holders in cardiovascular disease enterprises: Part I:aging arteries: a 'set up' for vascular disease. Circulation 2003;107: 139-146. 4. Laurent S, Boutouyrie P, Lacolley P. Structural and genetic basis of arterial stiffness. Hypertension 2005;45:1050-1055. 5. Kentish Je. Smooth muscle and the cardiovascular and lym-phatic systems. In: Stranding S, ed. Gray's Anatomy: The Ana-tomical Basis of Clinical Practice. 40th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone Elsevier; 2008:127-144. 6. Jacob MP. Extracellular matrix remodeling and matrix metal-loproteinases in the vascular wall during aging and in patho-logical conditions. Biomed Pharmacother 2003;57: 195-202. 7. Kavurma MM, Bhindi R, Lowe HC, et al. Vessel wall apopto-sis and atherosclerotic plaque instability. ] Thromh Haemosta-sis 2005;3:465-472. 8. Boddaert J, Mallat Z, Fornes P, et al. Age and gender effects on apoptosis in the human coronary arterial wall. Mech Age-ing Dev 2005;126:678-684. 9. Clarke MC, Littlewood TO, Figg N, et al. Chronic apoptosis of vascular smooth muscle cells accelerates atherosclerosis and promotes calcification and medial degeneration. Circ Res 2008; 192: 1529-1538. 10. Roijers RB, Debernardi N, Cleutjens JP, et al. Microcalcifica-tions in early intimal lesions of atherosclerotic human coro-nary arteries. Am] Pathol 2011. [Epub ahead of print] 11. Jono S, Shioi A, Ikari Y,et al. Vascular calcification in chronic kidney disease. ] Bone Miner Metah 2006;24: 176-181. 12. Maier W, Altwegg LA, Corti R, et al. Inflammatory markers at the site of ruptured plaque in acute myocardial infarc-tion: locally increased interleukin-6 and serum amyloid A but decreased C-reactive protein. Circulation 2005; Ill: 1355-1361. 13. Mucchiano GI, Haggqvist B, Sletten K, et al. Apolipoprotein A-I-derived amyloid in atherosclerotic plaques of the human aorta. ] Pathol 2001 ;193:270-275. 14. Schlatmann TJ, Becker AE. Histologic changes in the normal aging aorta: implications for dissecting aortic aneurysm. Am] Cardiol1977;39:13-20. 15. Hsue PY,Salinas CL, Bolger AF, et al. Acute aortic dissection related to crack cocaine. Circulation 2002;105:1592-1595. 16. Ihling C, Szombathy T, Nampoothiri K, et al. Cystic medial degeneration of the aorta is associated with p53 accumula-tion, Bax upregulation, apoptotic cell death, and cell prolif-eration. Heart 1999;82:286-293. 17. Gelb BD. Marian's syndrome and related disorders-more tightly connected than we thought. N EnglJ Med 2006;355:841-842. 18. Loeys BL, Schwarze U, Holm T, et al. Aneurysm syndromes caused by mutations in the TGF-~ receptor. N Engl ] Med 2006;355:788-798. 19. Judge DP, Dietz HC. Marfan's syndrome. Lancet 2005;366: 1965-1976. 20. Jain D, Dietz HC, Oswald GL, et al. Causes and histopathol-ogy of ascending aortic disease in children and young adults. Cardiovasc Pathol 2011 ;20: 15-25. 21. Hinterseher I, Tromp G, Kuivaniemi H. Genes and abdomi-nal aortic aneurysm. Ann Vasc Surg 2011;25:388-412. 22. Kuivaniemi H, Shibamura H, Arthur C, et al. Familial aortic aneurysms: collection of 233 multiplex families. ] Vasc Surg 2003;37:340-345. 23. Walker M, Gallagher PJ. The surgical pathology of large ves-sel disease. Diagn Histopathol 2010; 16:10-16. 24. Ryder HF, Tafe LJ, Burns CM. Fatal aortic dissection due to fulminant variety of isolated aortitis. ] Clin Rheumatol 2009; 15:295-299. 25. Stone JR. Aortitis, periaortitis and retroperitoneal fibrosis, as manifestations of IgG4-related systemic disease. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2011 ;23:88-94. 26. NirulaA, Glaser SM, Kalled Sl, et al. What is IgG4? A review of the biology of a unique immunoglobulin subtype. Curr Opin Rheumatol2011;23:119-124. 27. Szyszka-Mroz J, Wozniak W. A histological study of human ductus arteriosus during the last embryonic week. Folia Mor-phol 2003;62:365-367. 28. Anderson RH, Becker AE, Robertson WB. The arterial duct. In: Symmers WS, ed. The Cardiovascular System Part A.New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 1993:1193, 197-202. 29. Stary HC, Blankenhorn DH, Chandler AB, et al. A definition of the intima of human arteries and of its atherosclerosis-prone regions. A report from the Committee on Vascular Lesions of the Council on Arteriosclerosis, American Heart Association. Circulation 1992;85:391-405. 30. Kim C, Redberg RF, Pavlic T, et al. A systematic review of gender differences in mortality after coronary artery bypass graft surgery and percutaneous interventions. Clin Cardiol 2007;30:491-495. 31. Antoniadis AP, Chatzizisis YS, Giannoglou GD. Pathogenetic mechanisms of coronary ectasia. IntJ Cardiol2008; 130:335-343. 32. Kolodgie FD, Gold HK, Burke AP, et al. Intraplaque hemor-rhage and progression of coronary atheroma. N Engl ] Med 2003;349:2316-2325. 33. Virmani R, Kolodgie FD, Burke AP, et al. Lessons from sud-den coronary death: a comprehensive morphological classih-cation scheme for atherosclerotic lesions. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol2000;20:l262-1275. 34. van der Wal AC. Coronary artery pathology. Heart 2007; 93: 1484-1489. 35. Stone GW, Maehara A, Lansky AJ, et al. A prospective nat-ural-history study of coronary atherosclerosis. N Engl ] Med 2011;364:226-235. 36. Redgrave JNE, Lovett JK, Gallagher PJ, et al. Histological assessment of 526 symptomatic carotid plaques in relation to the nature and timing of ischemic symptoms. Circulation 2006; 113:2320-2328. 37. Camici PG, Crea F.Coronary microvascular dysfunction. N EnglJ Med 2007;356:830-840. 38. Hammes HP. Pericytes and the pathogenesis of diabetic reti-nopathy. Horm Metab Res 2005;37:39-43. 39. Ashgar 0,AI-SunniA, Khavandi K, et al. Diabetic Cardiomy-opathy. Clin Sci 2009;116:741-760. 40. Richards OC, Raines SM, Attie AD. The role of blood vessels, endothelial cells and vascular pericytes in insulin secretion and peripheral insulin activity. Endocrine Rev 2010 ;31:343-363. 41. Hayasaka H, Taniguchi K, Fukai S, et al. Neogenesis and development of the high endothelial venules that mediate lymphocyte trafficking. Cancer Sci 2010; 101:2302-2308. 42. Owens CD. Adaptive changes in autologous vein grafts for arterial reconstruction: clinical implications. ] Vasc Surg 2010; 51:736-746. 43. Langes K, Hort W. Intimal fibrosis in the saphenous vein of the lower limb: a quantitative analysis. Vir-chawsArchA PatholAnat Histopathol1992;421:127-131. 44. Mooi WJ, Grunberg K.Histopathology of pulmonary hyper-tensive diseases. Curr Diagn Pathol 2006;12:429-440. 45. Patchefsky AS. Nonneoplastic pulmonary disease. In: Mills SE, ed. Sternberg's Diagnostic Surgical Pathology. 5th ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &Wilkins; 2009: 1035-1039. 46. Warnock ML, Kunzmann A.Changes with age in muscular pulmonary arteries. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1977;101: 175-179. 47. Steiner I, Hajkova P, Kvasnicka J, et al. Myocardial sleeves of pulmonary vein and atrial fibrillation: a postmortem his-topathological study on 100 subjects. Virchaws Arch 2006; 449:88-95. 48. Gombos Z, Zhang PJ. Glomus tumor. Arch Pathol Lab Med 2008;132: 1448-1452. 49. Warkentin TE, Moore JC, Anand SS, et al. Gastrointesti-nal bleeding, angiodysplasia, cardiovascular disease, and acquired von Willebrand syndrome. Transfus Med Rev 2003; 17:272-286. 50. Baxter M, AIy EH. Dieulafoy's lesion:current trends in diagno-sis and management. Ann R Coll Surg Engl2010;92:548-554. 51. Boon LM, Ballieux F, Vikkula M. Pathogenesis of vascular anomalies. Clin Plastic Surg 2011;38: 7-19. 52. Pardali E, Goumans MJ, ten Dijke P. Signaling by members of the TGF-beta family in vascular morphogenesis and dis-ease. Trends Cell Biol2010;20:556-567. 53. Mulliken JB, Glowacki J. Hemangiomas and vascular malfor-mations in infants and children: a classification based on endo-thelial characteristics. Plast Reconstr Surg 1982;69:412-422. 54. Cahill AM, Nijs EL. Pediatric vascular malformations: patho-physiology, diagnosis, and the role of interventional radiology. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol2011;34:69l-704. 55. DompmartinA, Vikkula M, Boon LM. Venous malformation: update on aetiopathogenesis, diagnosis and management. Phlebology 2010;25:224-235. 56. Calonje E.Haemangiomas. In: Fletcher CDM, Unni KK, Mertens F, eds. World Health Organisation Classification of Tumours: Pathology and Genetics of Tumours of Soft Tissue and Bone. Lyon, France: IARC Press; 2002:156-158. 57. Rerkasam K, Rothwell PM. Systematic review of the opera-tive risks of carotid endarterectomy for recently symp-tomatic stenosis in relation to the timing of surgery. Stroke 2009;40:e564-e572. 58. Riles TS, Rockman CB. Cerebrovascular disease. In: Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers BM, Mattox KL eds. Sabiston Textbook of Surgery. 18th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2008: 1895-1899. 59. Garratt KN, Edwards WD, Kaufmann UP, et al. Differen-tial histopathology of primary atherosclerotic and restenotic lesions in coronary arteries and saphenous vein bypass grafts: analysis of tissue obtained from 73 patients by directional atherectomy.] Am Coll Cardiol1991;17:442-448. 60. Kalan JM, Roberts we. Morphologic findings in saphenous veins used as coronary arterial bypass conduits for longer than 1 year: necropsy analysis of 53 patients, 123 saphenous veins, and 1865 five-millimetre segments of veins. Am Heart ] 1990;119:1164-1184. 61. Jeremy JY, Gadsdon P, Shukla N, et al. On the biology of saphenous vein grafts fitted with external synthetic sheaths and stents. Biomaterials 2007;28:895-908. 62. Parang P, Arora R. Coronary vein graft disease: pathogenesis and prevention. Can] Cardiol2009;25:e57-e62. 63. Ali E, Saso S, Ahmed K, et al. When harvested for coronary artery bypass surgery, does a skeletonised or pedicled radial artery improve conduit patency? Interactive Cardiovasc Tho-rae Surg 2010;10:289-292. 64. D'Souza SP, Mamas MA, Fraser DG, et al. Routine early cor-onary angioplasty versus ischaemia-guided angioplasty after thrombolysis in acute ST elevation myocardial infarction: a meta analysis. Eur Heart] 2011 ;32:972-982. 65. Popma JJ,Bhatt DL. Percutaneous coronary and valvular intervention. In: Bonow R, Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, eds. Braunwald's Heart Disease. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:1270-1300. 66. Garcia-Garcia HM, Gonzalo N, Regar E, et al. Virtual histol-ogy and optical coherence tomography: from research to a broad clinical application. Heart 2009;95: 1362-1374. 67. Bradshaw SH, Kennedy L, Dexter DF, et al. A practical method to rapidly dissolve metallic stents. Cardiovasc Pathol 2009; 18: 127-133. 68. Kapadia MR, Popowich DA, Kibbe MR. Modified prosthetic vascular conduits. Circulation 2008; 117: 1873-1882. 69. Reitsma S, Slaaf DW, Vink H, et al. The endothelial glyco-calyx: composition, functions, and visualization. Pfiugers Arch-Eur] Physiol 2007;454:345-359. 70. Bazzoni G, Dejana E. Endothelial cell-to-cell junctions: molecular organization and role in vascular homeostasis. Physiol Rev 2004;84:869-901. 71. Van Itallie CM, Anderson JM. The molecular physiology of tight junction pores. Physiology 2004;19:331-338.72. Hsueh WA, Quinones MJ. Role of endothelial dysfunction in insulin resistance. Am] Cardiol2003;92:10J-17J. 73. Kirschner N, Bohner C, Rachow S, et al. Tight junctions: is there a role in dermatology. Arch Dermatol Res 2010;302:483-493. 74. Baum B, Georgiou M. Dynamics of adherens junctions in epithelial establishment, maintenance and remodeling.] Cell Biol2011;192:907-917. 75. Maeda S, Tsukihara T.Structure of the gap junction channel and its implications for its biological functions. Cell Mol Life Sci 2011;68:1115-1129. 76. Hesketh GG, Van EykJE, Tomaselli GF. Mechanisms of gap junction traffic in health and disease. ] Cardiovasc Pharm 2009;54:263-272. 77. Chidlow JH, Sessa WC. Caveolae, caveolins and cavins: complex control of cellular signaling and inflammation. Car-diovasc Res 2010;86:219-225. 78. Valentijn KM, Sadler JE, Valentijn JA, et al. Functional archi-tecture of Weibel- Palade bodies. Blood 2011 ;117:5033-5043. 79. Aird WC. Phenotypic heterogenity of the endothelium. II. Representative vascular beds. Circ Res 2007; 100: 174-190. 80. Giepmans BN. Gap junctions and connexin-interacting pro-teins. Cardiovasc Res 2004;62:233-245. 81. Dales JP, Garcia S, Carpentier S, et al. Prediction of metas-tasis risk using VEGF-Rl, VEGF-R2, Tie-2/Tek and CDI05 expression in breast cancer. Br] Cancer 2004;90: 1216-1221. 82. Kumar S, Ghellal A, LiC, et al. Breast carcinoma: vascular density determined using CD 105 antibody correlates with tumor prognosis. Cancer Res 1999;59:856-861. 83. North PE, Waner M, Mizeracki A, et al. GLUTl: a newly discovered immunohistochemical marker for juvenile hem-angiomas. Hum Pathol2000;31: 11-22. 84. Jackson DG. Biology of the lymphatic marker LYVE-l and applications in research into lymphatic trafficking and lym-phangiogenesis. APMIS 2004;112:526-538. 85. Kahn HJ, Bailey D, Marks A.Monoclonal antibody D2-40, a new marker of lymphatic endothelium, reacts with Kapo-si's sarcoma and a subset of angiosarcomas. Mod Pathol 2002; 15:4 34-440. 86. Desmouliere A, Chaponnier C, Gabbiani G. Tissue repair, contraction, and the myofibroblast. Wound Repair Regen 2005;13:7-12. 87. Hansson G K.Inflammation, atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease. N Engl] Med 2005;352:1685-1695. 88. Weyand CM, Goronzy JJ.Medium- and large-vessel vasculi-tis. N Engl] Med 2003;349:160-169. 89. Meijer-jorna LB, Mekkes JR, van der Wal AC. Platelet involvement in cutaneous small vessel vasculitis. ] Cutan Pathol 2002;29: 176-180. 90. Arbustini E, Morbini P, D'Armini AM, et al. Plaque composi-tion in plexogenic and thromboembolic pulmonary hyperten-sion: the critical role of thrombotic material in pultaceous core formation. Heart 2002;88:177-182. 91. Virmani R, Kolodgie FD, Burke AP, et al. Atherosclerotic plaque progression and vulnerability to rupture. Angiogenesis as a source of intraplaque hemorrhage. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol2005;25:2054-2061. I  